# ***Why the Head Turns Gray Before the Beard***



One day a king rode out into the countryside, where he met a poor Jewish farmer who was working in his field. The farmer’s head was gray and his beard was black. This struck the king as strange, so he called the man to him and said, “How is it that your head is gray and your beard is black?”

The man replied, “It’s because my head is older than my beard. And that’s why it turned gray first.” This reply pleased the king, and he commanded the man not to tell anyone what he had said. “You may tell it,” he said, “only after you have seen me a hundred times.” The man promised to obey the king’s command and the king rode away.

When he returned home, the king put the same question to his ministers: “Why does the head turn gray before the beard?” When none of them could come up with the right answer, he gave them a month to think the matter over, after which they were to bring him their replies.

The month passed quickly and the allotted time had nearly arrived, and still no one had found the right answer. It was then that one of the ministers remembered that the king had been riding in a certain district on the day when he had put his question. And so he too rode out in that district, and sure enough, he came upon the same Jewish farmer whose head was gray and whose beard was black. He approached the man and said, “Tell me, why is your hair gray and your beard black?”

“I’m sorry, but I’m not allowed to tell you.”

The minister said, “I’ll pay you well if you tell me.”

“All right,” said the man. “I’ll tell you after you’ve given me one hundred silver rubles.”

The minister immediately brought him one hundred silver rubles, and the man told him the answer to the riddle. The minister promptly reported it to the king.

The king, however, guessed at once that the Jewish farmer had divulged the answer. So he sent for the man and said, “Are you aware that you have earned a severe punishment for revealing the secret I commanded you to keep?”

The man replied, “Do you remember that you said I could reveal it only after I had seen you a hundred times?” Here, the man took the hundred silver rubles from his pocket and showed the king his likeness on each coin. “At first,” he said, “I refused to tell the secret. It was only after the minister had brought me the hundred rubles and I had seen your face on each of them that I felt I had a right to tell.”

The king, seeing that he was dealing with an astute man, decided not to punish him. Instead he asked the Jewish farmer to stay with him and be his advisor. From that time on, the king kept the man beside him and consulted him before he made any decision.

This caused jealousy among the king’s other ministers, and they concocted a plot to destroy him.

Now, the custom was that when the king summoned his ministers together to tell him stories, the first story was always told by the minister who sat on the king’s right. When he was done, he would tap the minister to his right with a stick. That official in turn would tell his story and then tap the minister to his right with the stick. And so on around the circle until the last minister, who sat at the king’s left, told the last story and the storytelling session was done.

Now, what the ministers plotted was to seat the Jewish farmer at the king’s left and then, against tradition, to start the storytelling in the middle of the circle. Thus when the Jew received the stick and finished telling his story, he, not being the last one to tell a tale, would have to strike the king with his stick. And striking the king was a crime punishable by death.

Well, the plot went as planned, and when the farmer received the stick, he suddenly understood what the ministers had in mind. So he turned to the king and said, “Before I tell my story, I’d like to ask your advice.”

“What is it?” said the king.

“Tell me what I ought to have done in the following situation: I was traveling along one day when I saw a great fire at a distance, and in that fire a number of people were trapped.”

“You ought to have rescued the people,” said the king.

“Very well, then. But as I hurried to rescue them, I came upon a deep pond that stood between me and the fire. If I entered the water, I would surely drown because I can’t swim, and that would be no help to the people in the fire. So I was brought to a dead stop. Now, my question to you is, “What should I have done?”

“You should certainly not have entered the pond. Your death would have been of no help to the people who were trapped.”

When the farmer heard the king’s reply, he handed the stick to the other ministers, saying, “If I used the stick to strike the king, it would be for me like drowning in the pond, and my death would have done you no good.”

The ministers, seeing that he had more wisdom than they, decided to patch up their quarrel and became his good friends from then on. And that was the end of that.