# ***The Clever Little Tailor***



Once upon a time in a small town there lived a tailor who wanted to be a singer—and not just a singer, but a cantor. One day his employer said, “I’ll tell you what. If you can beguile the animals of the forest with your fine singing, I’ll see to it that you become a cantor.”

“All right,” said the tailor, and off he went into the forest, singing. He sang and sang but not one animal responded. So he thought the matter over and decided to build a little wooden hut. A round hut with an attic. And when he had finished, he set out a great heap of meat in the downstairs room while he hid in the attic. As it happened, a passing hungry wolf smelled the meat. Approaching the hut, he saw that no one was there, so he went in and ate meat to his heart’s content. When he was full, he lay down to rest.

Then the tailor came down from the attic and said, “Wolf, wolf, how would you like to become a porter?”

“I’d like that very much,” said the wolf, “but I don’t know how.”

“Come,” said the tailor. “I’ll show you.” He led the wolf outside and then up to a pile of stones. “Wolf,” he said, “turn around with your shoulders toward me and I’ll show you how to become a porter.” The wolf did as he was told. He turned around with his shoulders toward the tailor. The tailor filled a sack with the stones and then, when he had tied the sack to the wolf’s shoulders, he ran off. The wolf tried to follow but couldn’t and began a dreadful howling.

Well, the tailor left him there howling and ran back to his attic, where he lay down and waited. As he lay there, a hungry bear came by and smelled the meat. Approaching the hut, he saw that no one was there, so he went in and ate meat to his heart’s content. When he was full, he lay down to rest.

Then the tailor came down from the attic and said, “Bear, how would you like to become a musician?”

“I’d like that,” said the bear, “but I have crooked fingers so I can’t hold a fiddle properly.”

“Come with me,” said the tailor. He led the bear to a village near a mill where there were huge round stones with clamps screwed into them. “Put your hands into the clamps,” he said to the bear, “and I’ll straighten your fingers so you can become a musician.” The bear did what he was told, and the tailor turned the screws until the bear’s paws were held tight. Then the tailor ran away. The bear tried to run after him, but he couldn’t get his paws loose. So he set up a dreadful yowling.

Well, the tailor left him there yowling and ran back to his attic, where he hid and waited. As it happened, a hungry fox passed by and smelled the meat. Approaching the hut, he saw that no one was there. But a fox is very sly, and so he thought, “Shall I go in or not?” Still considering the matter, he opened the door and went in. He saw that there was no meat left, though he could still smell it, and started to leave. But the tailor hurried down and grabbed his tail. “Fox,” he said, “how would you like to be a cantor?”

The fox replied, “No, I wouldn’t. What kind of a fool do you take me for?” And with that he yanked himself away so hard that his tail came off in the tailor’s hands. The fox, now without a tail and in pain, ran off, planning revenge against the tailor. “Well,” he thought, “I can’t do much by myself, but I’ll get all my animal friends together and we’ll teach him.”

The fox met a bird that said, “Why are you so unhappy?”

The fox replied, “Because the tailor tore my tail off when I said I didn’t want to become a cantor.”

The bird said, “Never mind. There’s a remedy near at hand. Dip yourself in that nearby stream, and your tail will grow again.” The fox did as he was told and his tail grew out again. Then he ran off to call his friends together so that they could get even with the tailor. As he ran, he came upon the wolf who was unable to move because his back was loaded with stones. The fox said, “What’s the matter with you?”

The wolf replied, “The tailor has turned me into a porter.”

The fox laughed, “Ah, fool that you are. The tailor is a cruel fellow, and this was his way to keep you from eating him up.” With that he untied the sack of stones and took them off the wolf’s shoulders, after which they ran along together. As they ran, they came upon the bear who stood with both of his forepaws clamped between the millstones.

“What’s the matter with you?” they asked.

“The tailor has turned me into a musician,” replied the bear.

“Ah, what a fool you are,” they laughed. “The tailor was simply afraid you would scratch him with your claws, and so he clamped your paws between the stones.” They released the bear, and then all three of them ran to find the tailor.

The tailor, seeing the animals running angrily toward him, thought of a way to fool them once again. He unbuckled his belt and dropped his trousers. Then he tied the torn-off fox’s tail to his own naked bottom. He turned around with his bottom toward the animals and began to wiggle the tail. The animals, who had never seen a creature like that before, were frightened and took to their heels until they were back in the forest.

When the tailor saw that, he returned to his employer and told him everything he had done. The employer laughed and laughed, and then saw to it that the tailor became a cantor, in a peasant village named Mara Tiara. And that’s that.