# ***Some True Miracles of God***



Once there was a poor *melamed* whose shrewish wife made life miserable for him. One day when he came back from reciting evening prayers at the synagogue, his wife poured out a torrent of abuse while she was serving his dinner. Finally he could take it no longer. “I can’t stand your howling!” he cried, and made up a bundle containing his *talis*, his *tfiln*, his gaberdine, and a couple of shirts. He put the bundle in a sack and took up his walking stick. When his wife had fallen asleep, he turned down the lamp, banked the fire in the hearth, kissed the *mezuze* on the door, and left home.

During the night his wife woke and saw that the door was unlatched and her unfortunate husband was gone. She concluded that he had left to bathe before saying his midnight prayers.

As the *melamed* went on his way, a snowstorm blew in on a strong wind. With the snow and wind in his face, he began to freeze. After a while it was impossible to go on, so he sat down to rest for half an hour, but the wind blew colder and colder. Finally he got up and went on his way, praying to God that he might come upon a settlement soon.

This time as he walked, he lost his bearings and reversed his direction. He thought he was going forward, but in fact he was retracing his steps. Since the wind now blew at his back, the *melamed* was grateful to God for coming to his help. But he continued to wish with all his heart that he might come to a village.

Walking quickly with the wind’s help, he did arrive at a settlement. All the houses were dark except one, in whose windows a gleam of light showed. And that house was his own home, but the *melamed* didn’t know it. He went up to the window and knocked, calling, “Please, please. Won’t you let me in? I’m a poor man, frozen through.” His wife recognized his voice at once, but she pretended she didn’t know him. She let him in and made up a bed with a warm feather comforter near the stove.

The poor fellow undressed and thanked God for His mercy. His wife put out the lamp. An hour or so later, she took her place beside him and before he knew it, the *melamed* felt himself to be truly fortunate. He had a good bed and more besides.

When he woke in the morning and looked around, and saw that he was in his own home in bed with his own shrew of a wife, he laughed out loud and said, “Blessed are the ways of the Lord.”

.   .   .




 


My grandfather and I would sit in the old synagogue in the interval between early and late evening prayers, and we’d talk quietly. It was then that he would tell me legends about the ancient sages and later heroes, about important events that happened long ago and in more recent times.

—Memoir from Berestetshke, Poland, 1925



The children of Hasidim would repeat the legends their fathers brought back from the rebbe’s court, legends about the miracles wrought by these wonder-workers.

—Memoir from Eastern Europe, ca. 1930


*T*he stories in this section are all legends. Since they are mainly religious stories, it is not always easy to make a sharp distinction between them and the pious tales. Traditions that were once strongly attached to particular persons or places have tended to wander so that it is difficult to determine their original contexts. The characteristic difference between the two kinds of tales, however, is that while the pious tales were perceived as fiction, the style and tone of the legends clearly indicates that the tellers and their audiences believed that the tales were true.

The first group of legends in this section is centered on the wonder-working *tsadikim*, the saintly spiritual leaders of the Hasidic community. Hasidism is a pietistic mystical movement that emerged in the middle of the eighteenth century in the Ukrainian provinces of Podolia and Volhynia. Later it spread into Polish Galicia, Rumania, Hungary, and throughout Eastern and Central Europe. Today its centers are in the United States and Israel. Numerous dynastic *hoyfn* (courts( were formed in Eastern Europe, and each court had as its central figure a disciple, or a descendant of a disciple, of the Baal Shem Tov (literally, Master of the Good Name(, the founder of the movement. It was believed that through the extraordinary mystical powers of the *tsadek*, the charismatic spiritual leader, ordinary men could be brought closer to God. The central focus of Hasidic belief concerns God’s omnipresence in all things and a wish to achieve unity with the divine by intense concentration and the abandonment of self.

Each court nourished legends that testified to the wondrous powers of the rebbes of its particular dynastic line, as well as to their special personal and philosophical characteristics. The mere telling of these legends was viewed as a mystical experience. It was not only a means of glorifying the *tsadikim* but also of sharing in their piety and power. The Baal Shem Tov is said to have claimed that recounting tales in praise of the *tsadikim* was like engaging in *ma’aseh merkava*—the mysteries of the heavenly throne and chariot. To tell a legend about a Hasidic rebbe became itself a religious act, a meritorious deed.1

For over two hundred years a rich oral storytelling tradition flourished in Hasidic courts. It became, and continues to be, part of the Sabbath ritual: Hasidic men still meet three times on the Sabbath to pray and attend communal meals. At the *melave malke*, the fourth meal, they gather at the rebbe’s table to hear stories of Hasidic saints and sages. The *yortsayt*, anniversary, of the death of a rebbe, is another occasion for retelling the legends of his deeds. Of course the legends are also exchanged informally and casually in daily conversation and at the *shtibl*, the small Hasidic House of Prayer.

Typically, Hasidic legends are short. They contain only one episode, which is related in a linear fashion with no suspense. Some are told as eyewitness accounts, as “true” hagiography. For example, “A Modern Miracle” begins: “My father, may he rest in the light of paradise, loved to tell this tale about the Rebbe of Nizkhizh. Though it wasn’t really a tale, but something that actually happened to him.” Other legends, like “The Baal Shem Tov and the Herdsman,” may tell more about the Hasidic worldview than about actual events. Some are told in the “enigmatic mode,” like “Rebbe Malkiel and the 702 Candles,” so that the truth will be veiled from the eyes of scoffers.

As a group, the legends offer a garland of praise to these revered spiritual leaders. In some the tellers express awe at a rebbe’s superior faculties and unusual powers, ranging from mystic capacities to sympathetic magic. The rebbe is depicted as behaving in mysterious ways. In “The Boy Who Put Two Socks on One Foot,” for example, he can foresee the outcome of future events and has power to influence them. Like “The Fleet-Footed Tomeshef Rebbe,” he can traverse huge distances in the wink of an eye. He can be in two places at once; he can even ascend to heaven while remaining on earth.

These narratives also serve to give comfort. They catalogue the ordinary requests of the plain folk who traditionally came to the rebbe for help, as well as the fantasies they developed about how the rebbe might reverse their fortunes through a miracle. Like the pious tales, these legends deal most often with the mundane concerns of the adult world: a mean landlord, a well that goes dry, the hope for a child. The rebbe acts as helper and intermediary between God and men in these everyday trials. He hears the pleas of childless couples and prays for their fertility; he helps a woman in childbirth, and a child left alone. As in “The Curious Disciple,” he gives aid to troubled petitioners in their dealings with local squires and landlords.2 Curiously, it was not only the Hasidim who believed in the magical powers of the rebbes. According to An-ski, “In many villages, gentile peasants adopted the beliefs in wonder-working rebbes. It frequently happened that peasants would come to a rebbe with a *pidyen*, a petition for children … for good crops.”3 Thus, in “Rain and the Rebbe of Stolin,” peasants seek the rebbe’s help in a drought.

Hasidic rebbes are teachers of religious precepts and proper conduct, and some Hasidic legends contain motifs found in pious tales. A rebbe can, for example, be an admonisher, or a punisher, of the greedy, the stingy, the skeptics, disciples who go astray, or those who engage in scholarly nitpicking. He is not above being punished himself if he insists on satisfying his curiosity when that is forbidden.

From the anti-Hasidic camps come tales that poke fun at the so-called miracle workers. Both the traditionalist anti-Hasidic *misnagdim* as well as the modern enlightened *maskilim* scoffed at the supernatural powers attributed to the Hasidic rebbes. Amusing as such tales might be, the collectors of Yiddish oral legends tended to concentrate more on the Hasidic than the anti-Hasidic tales.

In the second group of legends presented in this section, the typical hero is a Biblical or post-Biblical rabbinic figure, a man who excels in scholarship and piety.4 Our sampler includes legends about Moses; Judah Halevi, the twelfth-century religious philosopher and poet; Rabbi Isaiah Horowitz, the seventeenth-century Cabalist; the Vilna Gaon, an eighteenth-century spiritual and intellectual leader; Jonathan Eybeschuetz, an eighteenth-century Talmudist; and Moses Schreiber, a nineteenth-century religious scholar.

Such legends may open with an attribution like: “This is the story that Rabbi Joshua ben Levi tells,” or “I heard this from my father when I was a boy.” This sort of opening serves to authenticate the veracity of the legend. There are numerous descriptions in the memoir literature of the *kheyder* -teacher who tells legends to the children about figures of the Bible “as if he had known them personally.”5 Among the favorite themes are disputes over matters of faith, unjust acts followed by penance, and Messianic longings. Some of the tales tell of the hero’s humility, or his exceptional kindness and humaneness; others treat his awesome wisdom or his ability to deal directly with the supernatural.

Such tales had a rich resonance both for rabbinic traditionalists as well as for Hasidim. In these tales, as Abraham Joshua Heschel puts it, “The present moment overflowed its bounds, since people lived not chronologically, but in a fusion of past and present. They lived with the great men of the past, not only in narrating tales about them, but also in their emotions and dreams. Jews studying the Talmud felt a kinship with its sages.… In their souls, simple Jews were always prepared to welcome the Messiah.”6

Our section closes with several Yiddish legends about secular historical figures. The heroes and villains are the politically and economically mighty: czars, emperors, and financiers. Often they appear unexpectedly and in disguise, not unlike Elijah the Prophet in the pious tales. Some of these legends reflect the actuality of East European Jewish life: the edicts that restricted legal rights, residence, and choice of occupation; the conscription laws which forced many Jewish soldiers to give up their religion.

The two legends about Czar Nicholas the First, “The Cantonist’s Mother and Czar Nicholas the First” and “Czar Nicholas Decrees the Burning of the Talmud,” show him as beneficent in one case and villainous in the second. History tells us that this nineteenth-century despot should not have been a positive figure in any Jewish legend. But legends, like tales told as fiction, may reveal fantasies. A mother whose son was inducted into the army at the age of twelve for twenty-five years of service may well have hoped for a miracle. She may have dreamed that the very czar who signed the inhumane conscription edict would take pity on her and free her son—if only he got to know her personally.

Legends about the much-loved Emperor Franz Josef of Austria, on the other hand, were always positive. Not only did his 1849 Constitution grant Jews civil and political rights, but his refusal to confirm the appointment of an anti-Semitic mayor in Vienna in 1895 was remembered with appreciation.

Yiddish lore about Napoleon Bonaparte was also current into the twentieth century. One memoirist from Gordz in Lithuania writes: “Some of the children of the higher grades in *kheyder* were proficient in telling wonderful legends about Napoleon which they had heard from their fathers and brothers.”7 As late as 1939, ethnographers collected numerous items of Jewish folklore—some favorable, some unfavorable—about Napoleon, including legends, jokes, games, and songs.8

The financier Rothschild was another subject of both legend and folksong. As suggested by the three short pieces included here, he did not fare too well in either genre. In fact, the last tale in this section cheerfully kills him off in his countinghouse.