# ***Sabbath in Paradise***



Once there was a *tsadek*, who was on a journey somewhere. I think his name was Reb Elimeylekh. Well, he traveled and traveled but couldn’t seem to get anywhere. Since the Sabbath was creeping up on him, Reb Elimeylekh sent his *shames*, his assistant, to look for the right road. Several hours went by, and still the *shames* had not returned. It was getting dark, so Reb Elimeylekh began to pray with great passion, the way such a *tsadek* does. His prayers resounded to the heavens.

Just then he saw a man coming and felt a bit better, because it meant that he must be near a settlement. The man approached and asked him if he wanted to spend the Sabbath with him. To which Reb Elimeylekh replied, “Well, why not?”

The man warned Reb Elimeylekh that when they got where they were going, he must not ask questions. In fact no matter what he might see, he must not make the slightest sound. Well, as you can imagine, he had no choice but to agree. They went on their way, and Reb Elimeylekh saw a wonderful palace in the distance.

The man took him up to its door and opened it. The room inside was so beautiful that Reb Elimeylekh’s eyes were dazzled. Then he heard music that seemed to be played by a fine band of *klezmer* musicians, and it was so lovely it almost overwhelmed him. The door opened, and several prayer quorums came in and began to sing with radiant faces.

An old man whose gray beard reached to his chest moved forward and recited the Sabbath service in such sweet tones that he seemed to be entirely transformed. Reb Elimeylekh was sorely tempted to ask him who all the people were, but remembering what his guide had told him, he said nothing. As they finished their prayers, the old man was given a golden goblet of wine. With smiling eyes he received the wine and blessed it. When he was done with the blessing, a woman’s voice was heard to say, “Amen.”

Later Reb Elimeylekh was led into a room even more beautiful than the first. He was seated beside other men at a table that had sparkling place settings. As for the food, his first bite sent a rush of pleasure coursing through his limbs.

When the meal was done, everyone at the table sang once more. Reb Elimeylekh was tempted again and again to ask what sort of place this was, but always he stopped himself, remembering what he had been told.

A while later his guide came over and said, “Follow me. I’ll show you where to sleep.” As he walked after the man, Reb Elimeylekh wondered whether he ought to say something now, but he restrained himself. The room into which he was led was so fragrant that he fell asleep at once.

It seemed that only a few hours had passed when he heard, as if in a dream, the singing of many birds. It was morning, and his guide soon appeared. Handing him a long shirt, he told Reb Elimeylekh that it was time to go to the bath. There he saw the men with whom he had eaten the night before. When Reb Elimeylekh descended into the bath, he couldn’t feel the water’s touch, that’s how blissful it was.

Later he went back to pray, and heard the same melodies he had heard the day before. Then it was time to read from the sacred Book, and it occurred to Reb Elimeylekh that now, since Torah readers are called up by name, he would learn who his guide was. But when he heard them calling out “*Moyreynu Moyshe bar Amram*, Our Teacher, Moses, son of Amram, the sixth portion,” he felt himself trembling. The next name he heard was *Dovid hameylekh*, King David. Then *Shloyme hameylekh*, King Solomon. When he heard *Avrom ovinu*, Our Father Abraham, being called to read the portion of the week, he was completely nonplussed. He wanted to say a few words to *Avrom ovinu*, but he restrained himself.

Later in the dining room they ate and sang. After that, Moses discoursed on the Torah, revealing such secrets as Reb Elimeylekh had never even dreamed of. The assembled company listened attentively, their faces bathed in light.

At dusk Reb Elimeylekh went to say his first evening prayers. When night fell, the old man, who was the Patriarch Abraham, made the *havdole* blessing marking the close of the Sabbath, and King David accompanied him with exquisite melodies on his violin.

After that several beautiful women entered and danced so well that everyone joined in. Then a voice called, “Quiet. The celestial council of justice is about to convene.” Hearing that, Reb Elimeylekh was unable to contain himself any longer and cried out “Ah!”

At once everything disappeared. He found himself standing in an open field.