# ***The Baal Shem Tov and the Herdsman***



The Baal Shem Tov, of blessed memory, was very anxious to know who would be his neighbor in paradise. One Sabbath evening when, as usual, he experienced an ascension of the soul, he learned that it would be a man named So-and-So, the son of Such-and-Such, a complete unknown who lived in a small *shtetl* somewhere. The Baal Shem wondered what was the nature of the man’s good deeds, that he was assured the kind of place in the World of Truth which he, the Baal Shem, had been able to earn only by an entire lifetime of sanctity.

Soon after the *havdole* service, he ordered Alexey, his coachman, to harness his horse. He rode off to the town where the man lived and inquired about him everywhere. But it seemed that no one knew him; Later, however, someone did remember that there was a person in town by that name. Still, the Baal Shem wouldn’t be interested in him; he was a herdsman of some sort. A crude fellow. Hardly an observant Jew, though he was decent enough.

The Baal Shem disguised himself in ragged old clothes. That evening at the outskirts of town, on a street where Gentiles lived, he knocked at the door that had been pointed out to him. A woman opened it and asked what he wanted. The Baal Shem replied that he was a beggar on a long journey, and that he wanted a night’s lodging.

When he was admitted, the Baal Shem saw a peasant’s house, complete with white doors and doorposts to which no *mezuzes* were attached. Not the sort of place that would make a good impression on the Baal Shem. “Where is your husband?” he asked.

“Busy with the cattle,” she replied irritably, then flung him a bit of black bread and pointed out a corner where he could sleep.

The Baal Shem leaned against a wall but found that he could not sleep. A little while later a rough fellow came in dressed like a peasant, with a coat made of pelts that was bound at the waist by a string. He carried a rude stick and a sack over his shoulder from which a peasant’s flute protruded. “Evidently the man of the house,” the Baal Shem thought.

Without so much as a “Good evening,” the herdsman flung down his sack and stick. Then he sat on the floor and demanded his supper.

When he was done, he nodded toward the Baal Shem and asked his wife, “Who’s that?”

The Baal Shem waited to see what would happen. When the man had eaten his bread and some groats—without washing his hands, without reciting a blessing—he took out his flute and played a melody. Then he flung himself down on the floor and went to sleep. Again without a blessing. Don’t even ask whether he recited the bedtime prayer.

The Baal Shem watched him with amazement. “Well,” he thought, “who knows? He may be a *lamedvovnik*. Perhaps he performs his holy work at night when everyone else is asleep.”

That night, the Baal Shem didn’t sleep a wink, afraid that he might miss the herdsman’s holy labors. But the herdsman slept like a log and never left off snoring.

At dawn the herdsman got up and tied on his rope belt. He put a piece of bread into his sack and went off to drive his cattle to pasture. Did he wash his hands or recite any benediction? What a ridiculous question.

The Baal Shem was more and more perplexed. Just the same, he dressed and stole after the herdsman. In the field the herdsman sat down, opened his sack, and took out his bread. Raising his eyes to the heavens, he said, “Lord, I want to eat.” Then he broke off a morsel of bread and ate it. That done, he lifted up his eyes again and said, “Dear Father in Heaven, thank You for giving me food. I wish there was some way I could serve You, but what can I do? I’m poor and untaught. Well, at least I can play You a little tune.”

When he had played his flute for a while, the man lay down and slept until noon. Then he woke and said again, “Lord, I want to eat.” He ate and played the flute some more.

At the end of that day the Baal Shem, in a very cheerful mood, returned to Mezhibuzh. There he told his disciples the story of the man who couldn’t take a bite without acknowledging the Creator of the Universe. And later he added, “Well for the man who is destined to be his neighbor in Paradise.”