# ***Yisroel, the Child Rebbe***



When the old Rebbe of Stolin, the grandfather of the present Rebbe, passed away, his son, Reb Yisroel of blessed memory, was still a little boy. Both are now in the world to come. Reb Yisroel died a few years back in Frankfurt-am-Main, which is why he was known as the Rebbe of Frankfurt.

He was (may he forgive these words from where he is now( something of a scamp. Though he had become the Rebbe, he used to chase about all day with other children, making mud pies and playing hide-and-seek and other such games. But all that to one side, people used to come from all over the world to consult him. He was, after all, the son of the Rebbe of Stolin. However hard they tried, though, they could never find him at home. He was always off somewhere—in the courtyard, in the garden, or God alone knows where.

One day a village innkeeper who was very unhappy came to consult the little Rebbe. Moved by some mad whim, his landlord, the local squire, had given the innkeeper three days to clear out of his domain. And neither tears nor such lamentations as would raise the dead would move him.

And so the innkeeper had come to the young Rebbe—who was nowhere to be found. Whenever they thought they had him, he just laughed and disappeared again. Well, the innkeeper hung around for two days without being able to talk to the Rebbe. Then heaven itself took pity on him and the Rebbe showed up in the garden, making mud pies.

The innkeeper approached and began to pour out his grief. “Woe is me, Rebbe. Advise me!” he cried. The boy did not answer, but dug holes in the ground and set sticks into them. “Dear Rebbe, what counsel shall I take away with me?” the innkeeper demanded. “You fool,” the Rebbe said angrily, “don’t you see these holes I’m digging?” The innkeeper caught an inkling of his meaning and went back home. There his wife ran to greet him, crying, “The wicked squire is dead, may his bones be scattered! He was careless as he was hunting and shot himself. We’re saved.”