# ***The Disciple Who Went Astray***



A former disciple paid a visit once to the Rebbe of Ostrovets. The Rebbe observed that the young man had changed in some way—something was amiss with him. The Rebbe asked him what had gone wrong. The disciple explained that while studying for his rabbinical examination he had begun to read secular books, and that they so absorbed him that he was neglecting his studies.

The Rebbe inquired, “Have you read one of those books today?”

“Yes,” the disciple replied.

The Rebbe said, “Tell me what the story was about.”

The disciple said, “Why should I trouble the Rebbe with an old wives’ tale?”

But the Rebbe insisted, and so the disciple told the story. It was about a man on a journey who was terribly hungry because he had nothing to eat. He found a lump of iron that was as round as a head and covered with mud. He picked it up, but he couldn’t eat it. He went on his way and came upon a man who was carrying a horse’s head. And of course the head could be eaten. So he said, “Give me the horse’s head, because I’m dying of hunger.”

The other man said, “Let me have the lump of iron and I’ll give you the horse’s head.”

And so the hungry man gave him the lump of iron and got the horse’s head to eat.

The other man took the lump of iron home with him. After he scraped the mud off, he discovered that it was a lump of gold. He said, “If the other fellow had known that it was a lump of gold, he never would have made the trade.”

The Rebbe said, “Do you know who that story is meant for? It’s meant for you. You had a golden head, and you’ve traded it for the head of a horse.”