# ***The Missed Moment of Redemption***



The Rebbe of Kaliv was one of the greatest of the Hungarian Rebbes. On the anniversary of his death Jews were granted the privilege of traveling to Kaliv by train free of charge. All they had to do was show a certificate from the city council.

It happened once that the Rebbe of Vizhnits sent three of his disciples to Kaliv for the Passover holiday. When they arrived and made their way to the Rebbe’s house, they found him outside chopping wood. They greeted him in the usual fashion, and the Rebbe honored them with the task of carrying in the wood. That, he said, would make them worthy of sharing his Passover meal.

They carried in the wood and waited impatiently for the holiday celebration to begin. Certainly the Vizhnits Rebbe would not have sent them such a great distance on Passover evening for nothing. They sat around the *seyder* table expectantly. The Rebbe, smiling the same sort of enigmatic smile as when he had bidden them carry wood, sat down with them. Then a Gentile boy and girl arrived and helped themselves to the Passover wine, after which all three, the Rebbe and the boy and girl, danced a cheerful dance, a *freylekhs*, together. They danced off into another room while the Vizhnits disciples looked at each other in dismay. What had they fallen into? “It must be that we have stumbled into the company of Satan. May the Merciful One help us to survive this holiday.”

The Rebbe came back and, looking pleased, inquired, “Well, how did you like them? Not a bad couple, eh? Do you approve of their betrothal?”

When they replied that they had not come to arrange any betrothals, the Rebbe became disconsolate and the service proceeded in silence.

After the first days of Passover, the disciples traveled home discontentedly. It goes without saying that they were also somewhat irritated with the Rebbe of Vizhnits, to whom they promptly reported the disturbing Passover they had had. “Ah,” groaned the Rebbe, “fools that you are. Had you but approved of the betrothal, then the Redemption would have come. Because the two Gentiles, the boy and the girl, were actually the angels Michael and Gabriel.”