# ***The Mekarev Rebbe gets Even with a Stingy Woman***



*Well, let me tell you a story that I myself heard some time ago from the old Rebbe of Mekarev, may he rest in peace. When it was time for me to do my military service, my mother, may she rest in peace, who was a follower of the Mekarev Rebbe, begged me to go with her to visit him. Well, at first I was reluctant, but finally she persuaded me. We came to the Rebbe’s house and spent the Sabbath there. On Sabbath night the Rebbe presided over a large and densely packed company. I pushed my way through the crowd hoping to hear a few of the Rebbe’s good words. And the Rebbe was telling some sort of tale—what it was illustrating, I can’t remember. But what I’m going to tell you is word for word what I heard the Rebbe say*.

“Gentlemen,” said the Rebbe of Mekarev, “listen. This happened a few years ago. My *shames* and I were traveling and came to a nearby village.” (The Rebbe gave the name of the village, but I can’t remember it just now.( “We stayed at an inn for a few days. The innkeeper’s wife, a mother of six daughters, asked me to pray that she might bear a son. If she had a son there would be someone to say *kadesh*, the mourner’s prayer, for her and her husband when the time came. Well, I agreed to pray for her and she promised me eighteen rubles in payment for my help.\*

“A year went by and Czar Nicholas issued an edict which, you may remember, forbade Jews to travel. Well! A royal decree. Several years went by and, of course, we did not travel. But then the decree was canceled. During the period when we were not permitted to travel, I learned that the innkeeper’s wife had, with God’s help, given birth to a son. So I sent my *shames* to the village to ask for the eighteen rubles. The innkeeper’s wife carried on at a great rate and absolutely refused to pay. ‘These are hard times,’ she said. ‘We can’t pay. I’ll send the money when things get better.’

“Well, what can you do? Curse her? After all, she’s the mother of small children. Curse the child? Why? What have I got against the child? So I prayed that God would send her twins the following year. And the good Lord complied. Miraculously, she gave birth to twins. Not a month later, the innkeeper’s wife hurried in to see me, crying, ‘Rebbe! Be good enough to pray for me. Ask the good Lord not to send me any more sons—or daughters either. Here,’ she said, with tears in her eyes, ‘here are the eighteen rubles I promised you. Take them.’ ”

*And that’s the sort of holy men there were in those times. Where do you find their like today?*


\* Eighteen is considered a lucky number in Jewish lore. The letter value of the number eighteen can be represented in Hebrew as the word *khay*, meaning “life.”