# ***The Happy Pair and the Baal Shem Tov***



A stingy tavern keeper who leased his tavern and a mill from the local nobleman had a manservant and a maidservant who were in love. The young couple could not marry because they did not have enough money. The maidservant had fifty rubles all told; and the manservant had fifty rubles all told. Each of them was saving the money for when they would marry.

In a nearby village there was a Jew who could not pay the rent on his house, and the nobleman decreed that he must hang. The man appealed to the Jewish community, crying, “Will you see me hanged for fifty rubles?”

No one came forward to save him, however, and the day came when the poor man was to die. Minutes before the hanging, the two servants cried, “Stop! We’ll pay the fifty rubles.” And thus the man was rescued from certain death.

Someone went to the Baal Shem Tov and told him the story, but he said, “I know about it. I’m going to see them tomorrow.”

The next day the Baal Shem Tov arrived in the village and had himself driven to the tavern where the two servants worked. When he had eaten and drunk, the Baal Shem turned to the young couple and asked them why they were still unmarried. The maidservant said, “We don’t have enough money.” And she started to tell him the story of the fifty rubles.

The Baal Shem said, “I know all about that. But do you still want to marry this young man?”

She replied, “What’s the good of saying I want to, if we haven’t got the wherewithal?”

The Baal Shem Tov said, “I’ll see to it that you’re married.” And he took them into town and saw to it that they were properly clothed, and then bought them whatever else they might need for their marriage.

At the wedding the Baal Shem asked the stingy tavern keeper what he would give the couple as a wedding present. The tavern keeper replied, “I can’t give them anything. I have children of my own, and who knows what will happen to me later in life? I can’t deprive my children of their inheritance.”

“In that case,” said the Baal Shem to the tavern keeper, *I’ll* give them wedding presents in your name. I’ll give them the tavern and the mill.”

This remark struck the man as so farfetched that he simply ignored it and walked off.

After the wedding the Baal Shem Tov invited the couple to come home with him. He told them to take a good deal of food with them. Then, just as they started out, the Baal Shem Tov suddenly disappeared, and the young couple were left alone in the countryside.

They walked and walked until they were in the middle of a forest. There they heard someone groaning. They went closer and the groaning got louder and louder. Suddenly, they came upon a pit and there in the pit lay a man and a horse. When the man saw the couple he said very weakly, “I’m hungry.” So the couple threw food down to him until he had eaten his fill and grown strong enough to climb out of the pit.

Well, how was it that the man and the horse happened to be there? As it turned out, he was the son of the nobleman who owned the tavern run by the stingy tavern keeper. The nobleman’s son had been missing for three days and was being sought everywhere. He had been on his way someplace when he fell into the pit, and if it had not been for the young couple, he would certainly have died of hunger.

Well, they all rode together to the nobleman’s house, and what celebration there was! The young nobleman told the whole story of how the couple had rescued him from death. In the evening, there was a great banquet, and the young nobleman’s mother called to the assembled company, “Let me have your advice. What shall I give the couple who rescued my son from death?”

All the people shouted, “Let them have the mill and the tavern!”

And so the stingy tavern keeper and his family had to leave their home and become beggars, while the former servants took over the tavern and the mill and became very rich.

But that’s not the end of the story. The Baal Shem Tov wanted to test whether they still had any memory of their earlier lives as poor folk. So he came to their village, but before entering their house he lay down in a puddle and got himself thoroughly dirty.

When he came into the house, a servant girl cried, “Get out of here. Just look at you, what a filthy mess you are.” The former maidservant, hearing this, came running in and scolded the servant girl and asked the man to come inside and brought him food at once.

Then the disguised Baal Shem said that he wanted a place to sleep, and the former maidservant prepared a bed for him. The Baal Shem said, “I’m not going to undress; I’m going to get into bed wrapped in my coat.”

“Well,” said the innkeeper’s wife, “never mind, just go to sleep. If the sheets get dirty, we’ll wash them.”

The next morning, after the Baal Shem Tov had eaten the breakfast the innkeeper’s wife served him, he told the couple who he was. He blessed them with happiness and abundance, then disappeared.

That’s the sort of thing the Baal Shem Tov used to do.