# ***The Fleet-Footed Tomeshef Rebbe***



The butchers of Tomeshef were traveling homeward on a certain Friday evening. When night began to fall, they calculated how much farther they still had to go, and they realized that even if they had horses fleeter than winged serpents, they would not arrive until after the lighting of the Sabbath candles.

As they rode through the forest some seven kilometers from Tomeshef, they saw Reb Yisrulishl, the Rebbe of Tomeshef, making his way home. They introduced themselves and offered him a seat in their wagon. But he refused, saying, “Go on, go on. I won’t ride with you, but you’d better go swiftly or you’ll not arrive until after the blessing of the Sabbath candles.”

The butchers were loath to leave him there, knowing that if it became known in Tomeshef that they had left the Rebbe in the woods, the people might be angry enough to stone them. But the Rebbe stubbornly refused to ride with them. The butchers, seeing that nothing they said made any impression, had to drive off without him.

They had traveled hardly half a kilometer when remorse overwhelmed them, so they rode back to the Rebbe and tried once again to persuade him.

But all for nothing. And this time they drove off as fast as they could, meaning to report in Tomeshef that they had seen the Rebbe in the woods. Perhaps someone else would ride out to get him.

When they reached Tomeshef, they found the Sabbath candles burning everywhere. And when they neared the Rebbe’s house, they were stunned by the sight of him pacing back and forth on his footbridge.