# ***The Reincarnation of Queen Esther***



The following took place in Khentshin at the court of the Rebbe of Khentshin, of blessed memory. It happened like this: There was for many years an idiot wandering about Khentshin who was called Mordkhe Mendl, the town fool. Like all such souls, he made his living by begging, and slept at night in the synagogue beside the stove. Then one night the news spread through the town that the idiot had died.

It goes without saying that nobody made much of a fuss over his death. Indeed, it occurred to no one to go to the funeral. But then a strange thing happened. The old Rebbe of Khentshin put on his *zhupitse*, his long satin coat, took his tall hat and his cane, and attended the funeral. All the while that the idiot was being buried, the Rebbe stood beside the grave with huge tears rolling down his face. His disciples, seeing him weep, were awestruck, but no one ventured to ask why he was crying. Not until several days later, when the Rebbe was presiding over his table, did any of them dare ask why he had wept at the grave of Mordkhe Mendl the fool.

The Rebbe gave a brief sigh and replied, “Let me tell you the story of what happened to my grandfather of blessed memory.

“A poor teacher, a very pious Jew, once lived in Khentshin. This Reb Borekh had a pale, sickly wife and a sweet little daughter named Esther. Reb Borekh was afflicted with a cough, and from time to time he brought up blood. But was there ever a poverty-stricken teacher who had time to devote to his own health? Well, our Reb Borekh’s cough got continually worse, with more and more blood, and then one day he took to his bed, where he lay for several weeks getting progressively weaker, until the end finally came and Reb Borekh died. He left his wife and twelve-year-old daughter Esther to struggle for their bits of dry bread.

“Well, one misfortune after another overtook them. First Esther contracted smallpox. Over the months that the child’s illness lasted, her mother spent the last of her few groshn and succeeded in rescuing her daughter from the Angel of Death. So Esther recovered, but her mother, as the result of long, sleepless nights, and days without food, became sick. At first she was not seriously ill, but later one of her lungs gave out and her situation became steadily worse. Good neighbors called the doctor, but God had something else in mind for her. After the mother had lain unconscious for a couple of weeks, she died.

“For the fully orphaned Esther a life of pain and grief began. At first people pitied her, but then they forgot her entirely. Well, hunger is a powerful force, and Esther was forced to beg for bread. Wherever she went she was given a few groshn, and that’s how she lived.

“But when it was Friday night, the night before the Sabbath, Esther would light the candles she bought with the money she had collected begging. And this began to irritate various prosperous people: how is it that one who lives by begging does not buy herself a dress, or shoes? Instead, she lights finer-looking Sabbath candles than many well-to-do women.

“The wrath of the women was so great that they began to scant the money they gave her. But no matter how little Esther got, she bought candles for the Sabbath, even if it meant giving up food.

“Finally the prosperous women were so angry that they gave her no money at all. They decided to donate bits of bread or Sabbath *khale* instead. ‘Now,’ they said, ‘let’s see where the child gets her candles.’ That Friday night, Esther’s window was indeed dark. On Sabbath morning it seemed to them that her door had been closed for much too long. Because her windows were covered, no one could look in, but finally the neighbors decided to break the door down. And this is what they found: Esther the orphan lay dead. From all appearances, she had been dead for several hours.”

Here the Rebbe paused. He sighed and went on: “And at the funeral on Sunday morning, my grandfather of blessed memory picked her grave plot out himself. And when she was buried, he delivered a fiery sermon that was part homily and part funeral oration. Whatever it was, my grandfather of blessed memory had never wept so much before in the course of a sermon. His disciples stood by, amazed, with tears in their eyes.

“Later when the Rebbe came home from the funeral, he told his intimates, ‘Know that the biblical Queen Esther experienced no deprivation in this life. For that reason, the Celestial Council of Justice decreed that she must be reincarnated as the daughter of a poor man and endure hunger and die, so that her portion in the world to come might not, God forbid, be diminished in any way.’ The Rebbe was silent, and there was silence in the room as well.”

“After an interval he said, ‘Do you see, my dear friends, how careful one must be of any soul? Because the very greatest of souls may find itself incarnated in the body of the most abject fool.’ ”