# ***The Penitent and the Rebbe of Tshekhenove***



A beautiful young woman from a good family hanged herself in a certain town one day. When she was cut down, people were unwilling to carry her home to her parents. So she was left lying before the gates of the cemetery, and the burial society was asked to appoint someone to sit with the body. It sent a young man who, sitting there all alone with her, was seized with lust and possessed the body. When he realized what he had done, he was overwhelmed with grief. He could find no peace. And the more he thought of what he had done, the more heavy-hearted he became. Unable to rest, he went to the great Rebbe of Tshekhenove and told him what he had done. The Rebbe said, “Step out of the house.” The man went out and stood in the vestibule.

There he sank into a trance of some sort—a waking sleep—in which it seemed to him that he was running past towns and forests, mountains and valleys. He saw beasts and wondrous other things. And it seemed to him that he ran and ran, and the sweat poured down his face.

All at once he ran toward a city. And there, in that place, was a beautiful young woman hanging before the city gate. And the man who was on watch before the gate started toward the suicide to do what the young man himself had done. So the young man killed the watchman to keep him from violating the body.

He was terrified and wept, because he had committed one great sin and now he had committed a second.

Just then the door of the Rebbe’s house opened and the young man was called back in. “Look at the clock,” the Rebbe said. The young man looked. No more than an hour and a quarter had passed since he had left the Rebbe’s chamber. “Well,” said the Rebbe, “what did you see?” The young man told him everything and then wept. “Now, Rebbe, I’ve killed a human being.”

“Console yourself,” said the Rebbe. “It was not a man you killed. What you killed was the *yeytser-hore*, the evil passion that led you to your sin.”