# ***The Boy Who Put Two Socks on One Foot***



There once was a tenant innkeeper who had no children. He used to go to his Rebbe and pester him again and again for a blessing that would produce a child. Finally the Rebbe said that in a year’s time a son would be born. And the Rebbe added that he wanted to be informed when the child came.

And that’s how it was. A year later the innkeeper’s wife gave birth to a son, and on the same day the innkeeper went to the Rebbe and invited him to the circumcision ceremony. But the news made the Rebbe so unhappy that he wept. The innkeeper insisted on knowing why. The Rebbe replied, “Your son will have many virtues and will become a great Talmudic scholar, but on the day he learns to put on *tfiln* he will drown—unless you watch him very carefully. You will receive a warning sign on the day that he puts two socks on the same foot and then hunts for the second sock.”

And that’s how it was. When the boy was thirteen years old, he started to put on *tfiln*. His father went to the synagogue with him, and when they got home, the boy became confused and had to lie down. He took his clothes off and went to sleep. When he awoke, he put two socks on the same foot and started to search for the second sock. His parents, seeing this, were very frightened. So they locked him into a room, but he broke a window and got out.

When the parents saw the open window, they ran to find their son. He was on his way to the river, but they brought him home and locked him up again. It was a very hot day and he kept wailing and begging to be let out to go bathe—or at least to be given something to drink, because he was burning up with heat. But his parents were adamant and kept him in the room until nightfall.

At dusk when people went to the river to bathe, they saw two human, double-headed creatures emerge from the water wringing their hands. “Oh woe,” they cried out, “it’s already so late, and still he hasn’t come.” Then they vanished.

The bathers told the story in the village, and there they learned that the two-headed creatures were waiting for the innkeeper’s son.

And that’s how the innkeeper and his wife saved their son from drowning.