# ***The Power of the Mourner’s Prayer***



Two young friends from the same town traveled to see the old Rebbe of Alexander, Reb Henekh of blessed memory. They arrived just as it was getting dark. The Rebbe greeted them, but ordered them to take the road to Lodz at once. He said that when they came to a fork in the road, they were to separate and each go a different way.

Both of the young men were frightened. The whole thing seemed very strange to them, especially the command to travel at night on an unknown road. But what could they do? They had the Rebbe’s instructions.

They were even more afraid when they came to the fork and parted company. In order to make things a bit more cheerful, they agreed to call out to each other as they went their ways. And so they did, until neither of them could hear the other.

One of the young men went on for a couple of hours until he came to a village, where he spent the night. The other, however, lost his way in a forest. After a couple of hours he caught a glimpse of a light and went toward it. He found that it came from a hut, which he entered. But no one was there, and he sat down in a corner of the room and dozed off. He woke when he heard an old man and a peasant woman come in, and as he watched, they began to dance. They danced for a considerable time; then the old man brought in a bundle of straw, which he lighted, and burned himself and the woman up. When they were consumed, they reappeared and began to dance again. Then they burned themselves up once more. And this happened several times. Watching, the young man was so terrified that he fell asleep from sheer fright.

When he woke in the morning, he found that he was lying in the forest and that there was no sign of the hut. He went at once to the Rebbe and told him all that had happened.

The Rebbe said, “My son, I sent you on your journey so that you would learn what you need to know: that old man you saw dancing was your father. When he was alive, he used to sin with that peasant woman. You were a small child when he died, and before his death he asked me to do him a kindness and arrange that a pious act be performed on his behalf. Now, this scene you witnessed last night is repeated every night. And you are permitted to see it so you would understand why you must say the mourners’ prayer, the *kadesh*, for him, and study a chapter of commentary from the Mishnah every day. Your acts of piety will help him.

From that time on, the young man performed those acts of piety.