# ***Reb Malkiel and the 702 Candles***



Reb Alter of Shtutsin used to tell the following story about Reb Malkiel the Rebbe of Lomzhe, the author of the *Divrey-Malkiel*.

One day Reb Malkiel lost his way on a journey. Because the Sabbath was rapidly approaching, it appeared that he would have to stop somewhere for the night. He noticed a hut some distance away and, drawing near, he was delighted to see a *mezuze* nailed to the doorpost. God had sent him to a Jewish home where he could spend the Sabbath.

He went into the hut and found a little boy playing on the floor and an old woman salting meat in preparation for the Sabbath meal. He said, “Tell me, may I spend the Sabbath here?”

The woman said loudly, “Yes.”

“Where is your husband?” he asked.

“He is pasturing the cattle in the woods,” she said.

In a while her husband came in, nodded at the woman, and greeted Reb Malkiel.

Sometime later, the woman blessed the Sabbath candles and they all seated themselves at the table. The man of the house made the prayer over the wine, as is the devout custom. He ate a bit of fish and a bit of meat and an olive-sized bit of the bread. After the meal he recited the blessings like a man of learning and then left the hut.

Reb Malkiel asked, “Where has your husband gone?”

The wife replied, “He’s spending the night in the woods with the cattle.” This struck Reb Malkiel as mysterious, and in general the husband gave him a strange feeling. In appearance his host seemed to be an unlettered workingman, but he had spoken his prayers and the blessing over the wine very much like a man of learning.

When the household was asleep, Reb Malkiel went to the bedside of the couple’s little boy and gave him a chain, a button, and other such shiny things that attract children. Then he said, “Show me where your father has gone.”

“All right,” the boy replied and led him to the woods. There they came to a cellar. The boy said, “In that cellar you’ll find a little door. If you open the door, you’ll see a room. My father is inside it.”

Reb Malkiel took the boy home and then returned to the cellar. When he opened the door, he was startled to see a number of people sitting around a table on which were 702 lighted candles. And every sort of good food was on the table, and at its head sat the man who had been Reb Malkiel’s Sabbath host. When the company saw Reb Malkiel, everyone stood up.

Reb Malkiel’s host, looking at him, opened a sacred text and pointed to it. He said “You see where it is written, ‘It is forbidden to inquire too deeply.’ ”

Reb Malkiel stayed with that company for the whole of the Sabbath, and on Sunday he went home. In Lomzhe he made inquiries about his host and was told that in winter the man sold bundles of logs and in summer he sold sand. But poor as he was, when he went to buy an *esreg*, a citron, before the Succos holiday, he always said, “Give me the best *esreg* you have and I’ll pay whatever you ask.”

The more Reb Malkiel discovered about the man whose guest he had been for the Sabbath, the clearer it became that he had been in the home of a *lamedvovnik*, one of the thirty-six hidden saintly men without whose merits the world could not continue to exist.