# ***A modern miracle***



My father, may he rest in the light of paradise, loved to tell this tale about the Rebbe of Nizkhizh. Though it wasn’t really a tale, but something that actually happened to him.

It occurred soon after my grandfather was married, when he was perhaps thirteen years old and still living in his father-in-law’s home. One day his father-in-law, who was a disciple of the Rebbe of Nizkhizh, decided to take a trip to visit his Rebbe. He took his son-in-law along, so that he might introduce him.

Off they went. Well, they arrived in Nizkhizh, settled into a rooming house, rested a while, and then went to see the Rebbe. The warden of the synagogue, seeing them, ushered them right in.

Oh yes … I nearly forgot the main thing. My father was wearing a new pair of lacquered boots, made to order. Now, lacquered boots were not considered Jewish dress, but something aristocratic, *daytshmerish*—that is, strictly for westernized moderns. But as an only son my father was much indulged; nothing was too good for him.

Well then, they walked in to see the Rebbe, and the boots went squeak, squeak, squeak. Step, squeak. Step, squeak. Well, never mind. They approached the Rebbe: my grandfather greeted him first, then introduced my father so that he too might greet him.

“You’ve a fine son-in-law,” the Rebbe said, and pinched my father’s cheek. “And he has fine boots,” the Rebbe added. “They go squeak, squeak, squeak, squeak.”

Later my grandfather said that he would have preferred for the Rebbe to slap him ten times than to say what he did. Well, what’s done is done. They stayed and joined the Rebbe’s circle over the Sabbath, and everything was fine. On Sunday just before they were to start home, they went to say their goodbyes to the Rebbe.

“No,” said the Rebbe, “what’s your hurry? If one can afford lacquered boots, one can afford to follow me too.” My father and my grandfather, blessed be his memory, felt their hearts sink, but if the Rebbe expressed a wish, who would object?

So they stayed. The next day, Monday, the Rebbe made his rounds in the district, and my father and his father-in-law followed him. They went first to one town, then to another. Perhaps, they thought at each place, the Rebbe would send them home from there. But no. Not on your life.

The Rebbe feigned ignorance of their discomfort. They followed after him for another week and a half, but still he didn’t let them out of his sight. Finally he said he wanted nine rubles, and then they could go home. “On your way,” the Rebbe remarked as they were making their farewells, “you will pass such-and-such a squire’s place, where there will be a hundred oxen for sale. You must go to him and buy fifty.”

Finally, and after much difficulty, they left the Rebbe. Altogether they had half a ruble in their pockets. How could they even consider following the Rebbe’s instructions? The real question was how they were going to make the long journey home with fifty kopecks.

But now listen. As they were passing some squire’s compound, the squire himself came out to greet them. “Hey, Jews. Do you want to buy something?” he cried cheerfully. “I have a hundred oxen to sell.”

“Pardon me, lord, but I have no money just now,” my grandfather replied.

“Who’s talking about money?” said the squire. “Go on, take the ones that please you, and you can pay some other time. I trust you.”

Well, to make a long story short, they picked out fifty of the oxen. The squire even lent them two herdsmen, and they went off with the cattle. Later they made a tidy profit from the resale, and that was the beginning of an important business relationship with the squire.

Clearly it was a miracle. This much I know.