# ***How Judah Halevi Entered Heaven alive***



In heaven, in paradise, there was a space available for the soul of a *tsadek* among the seats in the Celestial Council of Justice, right next to the Holy One, blessed be He. The *tsadikim*, the saintly ones in heaven, were asked, “Who is worthy to be seated in that most honorable place?” They divided into two camps: One group proposed the great poet and religious philosopher Judah Halevi; the second group objected. But the first group prevailed, so God sent for the Angel of Death and said, “Go bring me the soul of Judah Halevi. Do not come back without it.”

The Angel of Death descended to earth and, disguised as a short man with a pointed beard, went to Judah Halevi. He found the rabbi studying *gemore*, a commentary on the Mishnah. Now, that was bad for the Angel of Death, who could do nothing while the rabbi was at his pious work. Judah Halevi saw something in the man’s eyes that made him suspicious. He said, “What do you want?”

The Angel of Death replied, “I am the Angel of Death. God has sent me for your soul.” And he told him everything that had happened up in heaven.

“Stop. You’re not going to get what you came for. Your stories don’t fool me; you can’t have my soul,” said Judah Halevi.

The Angel of Death realized that he was in trouble. “What’s to be done?” he wondered. He couldn’t possibly go back without Judah Halevi’s soul. Then he had an idea. He said, “Climb up on my shoulders and I’ll take you up to the gates of paradise for a moment, where you can see what’s happening on your account.”

So Judah Halevi seated himself on the angel’s shoulders. And when they approached the gates of paradise, he saw heaven’s spacious hall—larger even than the synagogue in Koyl! The hall was empty because the saintly ones had gone out for a stroll with God. Judah Halevi leaped down from the shoulders of the Angel of Death and went into the hall, where he instantly made a vow: “No matter what, I’m not going to leave this place.”

When the saintly ones came back from their walk, they saw that there was a man from the world below wandering about. “We had to pass through seven sections of hell before we got in here, and look at him: not dead, and in heaven.”

But God, aware of the vow that Judah Halevi had made, commanded that the Book of Memories be brought before Him. Then He said, “If we find it written that there is even one vow that Judah Halevi did not keep in the world below, then this latest vow of his will be null and void.” But there was no record of such an unkept vow. And that is how Judah Halevi was allowed to stay in heaven, without having died.