# ***A Wonderful Legend of a Cave***



A rich Arab nobleman owned a cave in which a saintly Jew was buried. And the nobleman was one of the friendliest of the Gentiles. Understanding the nature of the man who lay there, he kept a light always burning over the grave, adding oil every day as needed.

The nobleman also kept his sheep in the cave, as people used to do in those days. His shepherd drove the flock out every morning, pastured them all day, and drove them back into the cave in the evening. And that had been his custom for many years.

One day the shepherd forgot to lock the door to the cave. All night he worried for fear someone would steal something, and at daybreak he quickly dressed and hurried to the cave. There he was astonished to find a wild animal standing immobile near the eternal light. The shepherd understood at once what had happened. The animal had meant to lick the oil in the light, but the spiritual power of the saintly man was so great that it had paralyzed the beast. So the shepherd killed the creature and from that time always left the door of the cave open. He no longer worried about thieves.

Early one day the nobleman went to the cave and to his surprise found the door unlocked. He was very angry with the shepherd and beat him, though the shepherd insisted that no one could possibly steal anything from the cave.

Finally the nobleman decided to test the shepherd’s claim, so he too left the cave unlocked. One night thieves sneaked in and filled their sacks with the goods that were stored there. Then they started to leave, but at once paralysis seized them. The cleverer of the thieves understood what was happening and flung their sacks away, and were thus able to escape. Those who did not think so quickly were left standing paralyzed, the sacks in their hands.

In the morning the nobleman entered the cave and found the slow-witted thieves holding the sacks. It was then that he fully appreciated the saintly man’s greatness.

He called in the Jewish inhabitants of his city and told them about the wonders worked by the holy man’s grave. After that, of course, he gave a banquet worthy of a king. And from then on he helped the Jews in every possible way.