# ***Waiting for the Messiah***



Ibn Ezra was a perpetual wanderer, traveling from village to village, from town to town. It happened once that he came to a town where he could hear no human sound, nor, as he entered, was anyone to be seen. He walked street after street, but all were empty. This struck him as so strange that he decided to enter a house to try and find a human being. As he went into the kitchen, he saw all sorts of good food on a table, but everything was cold because there was no fire in the hearth. In the second room he came upon a table laden with wines and brandies and baked goods—strudles, honey cakes, fruitcakes, and cookies—but no one was in the room. Amazement! When he went into a second house, it was like the first. And the same was true of every house in town.

He thought it over and decided to visit the synagogue. Now, the synagogue, it turned out, was filled with people. All wore their prayer shawls, and all stood stock-still. Then Ibn Ezra, of blessed memory, asked one of the men why he never moved, but the man did not even look at him. So Ibn Ezra approached a second man and begged him to explain the mystery. Why had they been standing there for so long, and why did they stand so still?

“Many, many years ago,” replied the man, “people went off to the synagogue for *kolnidre*. There the whole congregation, men, women, and children, felt a surge of power as they stood praying to God. And so they continued to stand all night long, feeling that the power was capable of changing the world. So convinced were they that this was true that they vowed, all of them, not to leave the synagogue until the Messiah came to lead them from it.

“Their decision,” the man went on, “created turmoil in heaven, because it was not yet the destined time for the Messiah. And so it was decreed that, since the congregation would not leave the synagogue unless the Messiah came, they must stand in the synagogue with their prayer shawls on until his arrival.

“And so we stand here all week long, except on Friday evening, when we celebrate the coming of the Sabbath. And we have been standing in just this way for many, many years as we wait for the Messiah.”

That was what the man said. And when Ibn Ezra heard it, he bade farewell and left him standing there until the coming of the Messiah which, we pray, may happen in our own days. Amen.