# ***Rabbi Jonathan and the Minister: A Disputation***



As everyone knows, Rabbi Jonathan, the author of *Urim ve Tummim*, was constantly engaged in debate with the greatest people in the nation over matters of faith.

And there were those who were not fond of him. It was, for example, said of him that in the intermediary days between the first two and last two days of Passover, he prayed using *tfiln* that did not contain parchment slips with the appropriate verses from the Bible.

The rabbi had a keen intelligence and he was a God-fearing man, as everyone knew. A story is told about a minister who, meaning to test Rabbi Jonathan’s intelligence, sent a messenger inviting him for a visit. However, the minister instructed his servants not to tell the rabbi where in the palace he was to be found.

Reb Jonathan came to the palace and asked to be shown to the minister’s room. One guard replied that he was in such-and-such a room; another guard gave the rabbi quite different directions. And so with all the guards: they gave him contradictory answers and directions. Finally the rabbi paused and, thinking the matter over, decided that the minister must be in a particular room. He went to it and, indeed, there was the minister.

When the rabbi presented himself, the minister was amazed. “Ha! How did you know I would be in this room? Who told you?”

“How could anyone have told me, since all your Swiss guards gave me contradictory directions? Now, we Jews have a saying, ‘Follow the majority.’ And that’s what I did. I thought through everything they told me and counted up the replies. It was clear that this was the room, so I went to it.”

“In that case,” said the minister, “why is it that you Jews don’t follow the majority in today’s world? Why do you insist on being a minority among the nations?”

The rabbi thought for a while, then he said, “In the palace, I followed the majority because I knew that you were here. What was in doubt was which room you were in. But we Jews have no doubts about where we are in the world. And that’s why we don’t accept conversion and remain a separate people.”