# ***Evening the Score***



Once upon a time there was a great famine in the land of Israel. Three men were sent abroad to raise funds for the needy. One was the Holy Shelah, Rabbi Isaiah Horowitz; the other was his assistant; and the third was a *shoykhet*, a ritual slaughterer of cattle and poultry.

When they arrived on this side of the sea, they rented a horse and wagon and traveled from town to town and from city to city, gathering alms for the starving. In order to keep the wagon driver from knowing where they kept the money, two of them—the Shelah and the *shoykhet*—drilled a hole in a floorboard of the wagon and poured the coins into it. But they drilled too deep, so that the money went in on one side of the floorboard and fell through the other side.

At last they had gathered a goodly sum and were planning to return home. As they approached the border, they went to take the money from its hiding place. To their horror they found not so much as a single coin left.

Suspicion immediately fell on the *shoykhet*. Well, there was no way for him to go back and begin collecting again, so with a heavy heart the poor man made his way home. There the case was investigated, and it was concluded that it must have been he who took the money. And so he was condemned to have an ear cut off and was barred from his profession. And it was done.

So he became a homeless wanderer. One day in the course of his travels he went into a store where the shopkeeper was already waiting on a customer. The *shoykhet* did not want to disturb them, so he took a chair near the wall to wait his turn. As he sat, he heard them making a mistake in the bill. He went up to the shopkeeper and his customer and, apologizing for his interference, pointed out that such-and-such a mistake had been made in the bill. They added it up once more, and it turned out that he was right.

The owner of the shop was a widow, so she asked the *shoykhet* to work for her as a bookkeeper. And that’s what happened. He settled down there.

When some time had passed, the shopkeeper came in one day all dressed in her holiday finery and said, “I’m a widow and you please me. I’d like for us to be married.” He thought she was making fun of him—after all, she was a very rich woman.

To make a long story short, they were married. Of course, now everything changed for him. Now he was well fed and well dressed, and he had a gold watch and chain like a rich man.

It turned out that the Shelah went once again on a fund-gathering trip. On the evening before Passover, he asked people in the town where he happened to be staying to recommend a household that strictly observed the dietary laws—in which he could spend the holiday. Everyone said he should go to the house of such-and-such a man, that is, to the former *shoykhet*, because no one was more pious or kept a more kosher home.

The Shelah inquired at the house if he might stay there over the holiday. “We would be honored to have you,” said the former *shoykhet*, whom the Shelah did not recognize. The *shoykhet*, on the other hand, recognized the Shelah. He set aside a room for the holy man and furnished it with everything needful.

On the night before Passover, the *shoykhet* bought a bottle of smelling salts and sharpened his slaughtering knife. Then he went into the Shelah’s room and said in a commanding voice, “Now, come and lie down.” The Shelah was terribly frightened, but the *shoykhet* shouted, “There’s no help for it. You can’t possibly fight me. Lie down; I’m going to tie you up.” The Shelah begged for a little time so he could say *vide*, his final confession of sins, and the *shoykhet* agreed. Then he tied him, one hand to one foot, the way one binds cattle, and so tightly that the Shelah fainted dead away. With that the *shoykhet* let him sniff the smelling salts, and the Shelah slowly came back to consciousness. He said to the *shoykhet*, “I see that you didn’t kill me. So what was the point of all that?” The *shoykhet* reminded him of all that had happened. And he had worried, said the *shoykhet*, that a man as holy as the Shelah might come before the Seat of Judgment having committed the great sin of defaming an innocent man. And so he had contrived for the Shelah to do penance in this world.