# ***Reb Leybele of Mir goes to the Marketplace***



In the town of Mir, once a famous center of Torah scholarship, there lived Reb Leybele Mirkes, a naïve soul who studied Torah day and night and knew nothing at all about business. It happened one day that as he was studying in his chamber, the door opened and his wife said angrily, “Why don’t you become a businessman? We’re getting poorer with every passing day.” Reb Leybele tried to reason with her, explaining, “You can’t teach this old dog new tricks.” But she wouldn’t listen. Seeing that he could not pacify her, he had no choice but to do what she wanted. He made one condition, however: “I’ll travel to buy the goods, but you’ll have to sell them.” She agreed to his proposal.

The town seethed with excitement when they learned that Reb Leybele had decided to go traveling on business. No one could believe that a man who had never been anything but a scholar, and who hardly knew what a coin looked like, would be able to conduct business.

Since there were no trains in those days, Reb Leybele bought a horse and wagon and hired a driver. He took a packet containing ten thousand rubles and started off one morning. He had spent the night in prayer and Torah study, and had asked the Lord to make his journey prosper. In the morning at dawn he had gone to pray with the congregation, and after reciting his prayers, he had spent half the day studying various texts, as was his usual habit. Then he ate breakfast, after which he recited blessings. Finally, and with great difficulty, he got into his wagon which, as if it were teasing him, moved ever so slowly out of the town.

As he traveled, Reb Leybele interrupted his journey at every prayer time so that he could join whatever congregation was near. And he studied Torah texts as well, which of course doubled the time he spent in each village.

When he came at last to the great fair in the town of Zeleve where he was to buy goods, he went to the home of the local rabbi. There he wanted to discuss a difficult passage in a volume by the Rambam, Maimonides. The rabbi, seeing that Reb Leybele had come to Zeleve on business, interrupted to tell him that the fair had closed down long ago. Reb Leybele was not at all disturbed. “Ah well,” he said, “there’ll still be goods to buy.” Wondering what sort of man this was, the rabbi bade him farewell.

Reb Leybele went into town and called on various brokers. Since the particular cloth he asked for had sold out at the fair, they all urged him to buy red cloth of the sort used to trim hats and the seams of officers’ trousers. No more than nine ells of that cloth were ever used during a year in Reb Leybele’s town of Mir. But the brokers talked fast and hard, and in the end he bought ten thousand rubles’ worth of red cloth. His business done, he climbed into his wagon and started back to Mir.

When he got home and displayed his bargain cloth, his wife scolded him bitterly. “What have you bought?” she shouted. “Have you gone completely out of your mind?” Reb Leybele replied, “Do you think there’s only a black god in heaven? There’s a red god as well.”

Everyone was surprised when Reb Leybele was summoned to nearby Neshviezh, to the home of Count Radzivil. There the servants told him that the count, having read a minister’s report regarding troops, had ordered the minister to buy red uniforms for the whole regiment, soldiers as well as officers. That is a lot of red cloth, and the entire order was indeed filled by Reb Leybele Mirkes. This transaction made him rich for the rest of his days.