# ***Bad Luck***



Once upon a time there were two brothers, one rich, the other poor. The rich brother supported the poor one, but there came a day when the rich man’s wife said, “Enough. You’ve given him enough. No more.”

Well, what was the poor brother to do? Then he thought, “It might be a good thing to take my family and move to another town. Who knows? A change of place, a change of luck.”

He gathered his household goods, put them and his wife and children into a wagon, and drove off. When he had gone some distance, he remembered that he had forgotten a pot. He stopped the wagon and ran back to his house for it, and inside he found a tall stranger leaning against a pillar.

The stranger seemed very pleased to see him, which frightened the poor man. He snatched up the pot and ran off to the wagon, but looking back, he saw the stranger running after him. “Sir,” said the poor man, “what do you want from me?”

“Don’t you know who I am?” said the stranger. “I’m your bad luck. Where you go, I go.” And he climbed into the wagon.

Well, there was nothing to be done. So the poor man drove on with a heavy heart until they entered a forest. There he had an idea. He took his ax and went up to a huge tree and began to chop away. He swung the ax so hard that it stuck deep in the wood and wouldn’t budge.

“See here,” he said to the tall man, “it’s true you’re my bad luck. But that doesn’t mean you can’t help me out a little. Put your fingers into the crack so I can get my ax out and we can go on our way.”

And that’s what the tall man did. He put both his hands into the crack, and the poor man pulled out his ax and left the tall man standing there with his hands caught.

The poor man and his wife and children drove off until they came to a city. There he went into business and, with God’s help, prospered and became rich and happy.

When the rich brother heard the news that his poor brother was now rich, he thought, “Let’s see if I can find out what changed his luck.” So he set off on the same road his brother had taken and came to the place where the tall man was still standing with his fingers caught in the tree.

The tall stranger wept and pleaded, “Please, please help me.”

“How can I help you?” the rich brother asked. “What do you want me to do?”

The tall man told him the whole story: “I’m your brother’s bad luck, and he’s run away from me. I beg you, get an ax and drive it into the crack of the tree so I can get my fingers out.”

“If I do, will you go back to my brother?” asked the rich man.

“Of course,” said the tall man.

When the rich man drove the ax into the crack, the tall man pulled out his hands. Then he leaped and danced for joy and kissed the rich man. “What a good fellow!” he said. “From now on I live with you. You’re so rich that I’ll be well taken care of, and it was always a hard life with your brother.”

And that’s what happened: the poor brother was rich, and the rich brother grew poor.




#  .   .   .


I never heard a *maysele* from my grandfather. He was always engrossed in the study of Talmudic law, in pious acts, in prayer, and in the Torah. But my grandmother—it was she who told me a *maysele*, or asked me a riddle. At twilight on *shabes*, as it got dark outside and long evening shadows fell over our ill-constructed little house, my grandmother Khane would sit me on her lap near the large clay oven and tell me a story.

—Memoir from Pumpyan, Lithuania, ca. 1920


***A***lmost everyone’s experience with folktales begins in childhood. The tales in this section are for young children, and often about them too. They were told throughout the Yiddish-speaking world, and traveled to America as well. I can recall sitting in my grandmother’s lap while she combed my hair and related “Stones and Bones Rattle in My Belly” in her Ukrainian-Yiddish dialect. My children in turn remember my mother telling the same tale to them. Their favorite, though, was an adventure story about a very young hero named Bebele, Little Bean, that their grandfather, *zeyde Maks*, told them at bedtime.

Some of these tales are simple and consist of a single incident, while others have a more complex plot. Rhymed verses may be part of a story, as in “Moyshele and Sheyndele,” and rhymed endings commonly recur. One favorite is:

*A hun un a hon* A rooster and a hen   *Dos maysele heybt zikh on*.      Now my story’s begun.   *A kats un a moyz* A cat and a mouse   *Dos maysele lozt zikh oys*. Now my story is done.   

And another:

*A flekl arayn, a flekl aroys*     One spot out, one spot in   *Dos maysele iz oys*. My little tale is done.   

The beginning of these tales is almost always *Amol iz geven* … or, “Once upon a time …” Many open with “Once upon a time there was a rabbi and his wife …” The abundant use of diminutives—the suffix -*ele* (“little”( is attached to many of the nouns—is a clear indicator of a tale for little folk. Indeed, the genre itself is called the *maysele* in Yiddish, literally, “little tale”—or *kinder-maysele*, “little tale for children.”

There are several categories of *kinder-mayselekh*. Didactic tales such as “The Naughty Little Girl” teach the lesson of obedience to one’s parents. In “A Tale of Two Brothers” the lessons to be learned are kindness to animals and respect for nature, while the importance of good manners is dramatized in “Next Time That’s What I’ll Say.” These tales warn of what may happen to a child who is impolite or disobedient.

Tales told from a child’s point of view make up another group. Some, like “Clever Khashinke and Foolish Bashinke,” tell of parental favoritism, of the consequent rivalry between the goody-goody and the bumbling child, and of justice restored. Others, like “Stones and Bones Rattle in My Belly,” evoke common childhood terrors, such as the fear of being left alone. Yet others, like “Moyshele and Sheyndele,” test the limits of disobedience, sometimes with drastic consequences. “Next Time That’s What I’ll Say,” and “Little Bean” are tales told by children.

Finally there are the nonsense tales that form part of the humorous repertoire of and for the very young. They are called lign-mayselekh“little fibbing tales,” or tales that are *nisht geshtoygn, nisht gefloygn*—far-fetched; literally, “that neither ascend nor fly.” Their humor lies in a continuous flow of contradictions, nonsequitors, and strange juxtapositions of people and events. They were especially popular at Purim, the holiday that celebrates the defeat of Haman in his plans to destroy the Jews of Persia during the reign of King Ahaseurus. A carnival mood pervades this holiday, and nonsense tales were part of the revelry.