# ***Nafol tipol: Napoleon, You Will Fall***



When Napoleon drove through Kozhenits, he heard that the town had a pious man who was known as the Preacher of Kozhenits. Napoleon was curious to meet this saintly figure and to question him about his war with Russia. He consulted his officers, and it was decided that he should disguise himself as an ordinary person. If the Preacher of Kozhenits recognized him, it would be proof that he had extraordinary powers.

So Napoleon disguised himself as an ordinary general and went to visit the Preacher of Kozhenits. The Preacher, of blessed memory, was the child of his parents’ old age and had been sickly all his days. He was so weak that he studied Torah lying in bed, but the moment Napoleon came into the house, the Preacher got to his feet and recited the blessing one makes over royalty. The emperor was amazed and said, “It’s true I am the emperor. But how did you recognize me in the uniform of an ordinary general?”

The Kozhenits Preacher replied, “It’s because your guardian angel came in with you, and I recognized him at once.”

So Napoleon questioned the Preacher regarding his war with Russia. The holy man said, “You’d do well to harness your carriage and head toward Paris at once, because soon it will be too late.”

Napoleon said, “If it happens that I am triumphant in my war against Russia, I’ll have you hanged over the town gate.” Then he left in a rage. No sooner had he gone than the Preacher took down the Book of Esther and, chanting the text, read the words *Nafol tipol*, “Thou shalt surely fall,” from which he deduced the meaning, “*Napoleon tipol*, Napoleon, you will fall.”