# ***The Cantonist’s Mother and Nicholas the First***



*When I was a boy of ten or eleven, my greatest delight in the winter season was to sit with the graybeards near the warm stove in the study and prayer house as the* Eyn Yankev *\[a popular collection of Talmudic stories and commentaries\] was being read. This occurred in the interval between late afternoon and evening prayers, and sometimes it happened that the reader did not come, or came late. Then and on some Saturday nights, the graybeards would tell tales. One of these old men was fascinated by Czar Nicholas the First, and his cronies teased him for constantly telling stories about Nicholas. Still, when he started on one of his tales, like this one, they listened with pleasure*.

Nicholas used to enjoy disguising himself in peasant’s clothing or worn military uniforms and wandering about to see what was going on and hear what was being said about him. Many an unwary person was ruined because he didn’t guard his tongue in the presence of the disguised czar.

On one of these excursions through his villages in the Jewish Pale of Settlement, the czar and his entourage entered a forest to hunt. Nicholas, dressed like a common soldier in a ragged coat, took a wrong turning and lost his way. It was evening. A light snow had begun to fall which grew heavier and heavier until it turned into a true blizzard. Fortunately for Nicholas, he noticed a gleam of light and followed it until he arrived at an inn run by an old Jewish widow. When the woman saw the exhausted, frozen soldier, she snatched up a broom and brushed the snow off him, removed his torn greatcoat, and settled him at a place on the stove to warm himself. Then she turned to brew him a cup of chicory. All the while that she was cleaning him up and cooking for him, she repeated, “Oh, my boy. You’re absolutely frozen.”

There were peasants already sitting in the room. When they saw the ragged, shivering soldier, they began to call down fire and brimstone on the czar—Czar Nicholas. Their complaints were the old ones: that all the czar ever did was skin them alive, enslave them, draft them into the army forever. And so on, and so on.

The widow, however, defended the czar and made excuses for him. She argued that peasants weren’t smart enough to know who was the one truly responsible. She pointed out that even if the czar were an angel, he wouldn’t be able to help them because his noblemen kept him ignorant. “I can’t believe,” she insisted, “that one chosen by God to be czar is a bad man. Just don’t forget—he’s God’s annointed.”

The peasants didn’t agree with her and became increasingly excited. They used her own case as an example: Whoever heard, they asked, of taking away the only son of a woman as old as she was? But she held stubbornly to her view that the czar was absolutely not responsible for drafting her son into the army. She felt sure that if the czar knew what her situation was, he would send her son home. As she talked, she handed food and drink to her “little boy,” as she called the frozen soldier.

When all the peasants had left the inn, she prepared a soft place for Nicholas to sleep and gave him a warm quilt. And so it was her amazing luck to have Nicholas the First himself spend the night as her guest. In the morning when her “boy” had had a bit of herring for his breakfast and washed it down with a cup of chicory, he said, “Granny, how did it happen that your one and only son was taken away?”

“It’s because I’m a poor widow and I have no one to take my part. The rich pay to keep their sons out of the army. So when the czar’s *khapers*\* come to our villages, they pay no attention to the cries of the poor. They grab even such sons as mine—even an only son. It does no good to complain.”



“Granny,” said the czar, “why didn’t you go to the provincial capital and complain to the governor?”

She replied, “Ah, my dear, I went there. It was very, very hard for me to get to him. But at last I succeeded in presenting my petition and the rural district’s certificate of judgment that my son was an only child. I begged him to give my son back to me. And he promised to do it. But, my boy, you see how it is. It’s been more than half a year and my son isn’t back yet.”

She heaved a sigh, shook her aged head, and said, “No, my boy, it’s hard to get justice if you’re poor and old.”

Nicholas asked her for a piece of paper, but she had none. So he tore out the endpaper of the Book of Psalms he found on one of her shelves and wrote a few words on it. He handed her the sheet and told her to take it to town and give it to the bailiff. He would send it where it ought to go, and her son would certainly be returned to her.

She looked at him, amazed. “Ah, my boy, what good is your bit of paper? If the governor himself, though he promised, didn’t help me, then certainly you can’t. At the most, the bailiff will laugh at your note and at me for bringing it.” But Nicholas insisted that his paper would help. He said that if she got a horse and sleigh, he would ride part of the way with her to the bailiff.

Once in the sleigh, Nicholas cautioned the old woman not to show his note to anyone but the bailiff. Then he bade her a warm farewell and promised that he would see her again after she and her son were reunited.

In town the old woman, following Nicholas’s instructions, went directly to the bailiff’s house and gave him the paper. The bailiff read it and immediately invited her to sit down. Then he asked her to describe the man she called “this little boy.” She told him what the soldier looked like and how he had stumbled, frozen and snow-covered, into her inn. She told him too that she hadn’t wanted to bring the note, but that the soldier had forced her to.

The bailiff observed that she had done well to follow the soldier’s advice, because her son would shortly be returned to her. Then he accompanied her to the sled, helped to settle her into it, and once again assured her that her son would be home very soon.

And indeed, not long after that her dear son, wearing new woolen clothes, came home in a sleigh drawn by post-horses. Plenty of happy tears were shed by both of them. After they calmed down, her son related all the hardships he had endured from the time the *khapers* took him until he finally came home. And the old woman told him everything that had happened to her: how a poor soldier had sent her to the bailiff with a note ordering her son discharged. And how she had not wanted to go, and how the soldier had insisted.

A little while later, the old woman and her son heard from the peasants in the village what had happened in the town where the *khapers* lived. Cossacks had surrounded the town at night, and early in the morning the authorities rounded up all the *khapers* and all the rich people of the town, put them in chains, and took them away—no one knew why or where.

Later still, the governor himself came to the town and drafted every rich young man into the army. The old woman and her son were beginning to wonder who that soldier might have been, and what danger they might be in since she had, at first, refused to follow his instructions.

Not long after these events, an expensive carriage bearing several officials pulled up before their inn. The mother and son watched in fear as the officials made their way inside, but one of them told the woman not to be frightened, since they had come only to take her and her son to visit a good friend. At their urging, mother and son took their places in the carriage, though they were afraid to move a muscle lest, God forbid, they inadvertently damage it.

The carriage drew up before a palace, where beautifully dressed servants hastened to greet them. They were taken to baths and washed clean, then dressed in fine clothes. Later they were escorted to a second palace and shown the rooms in which they would sleep. The servants brought them food, as well as a certificate that the food was kosher.

They stayed in the palace for a week, eating and drinking the best of everything. Then an official led them to an even finer palace and into a large, richly decorated hall. There they sat and waited, until a side door opened and Nicholas the First entered. Thinking that he had come to lead them to another hall, they rose. Nicholas drew nearer to the old woman and said with a smile, “Granny, take a good look at me. Maybe you’ll know who I am.” She looked him over for a while, then shook her head. So Nicholas removed his uniform and stood before her in the ragged overcoat that he had worn when he first stumbled to her inn. The old woman had just time to cry, “Oh, my little boy!” before she fainted.

When she opened her eyes, she found herself lying in a royal bed. Beside it stood her son and a physician. She whispered “My little boy,” over and over again. “My little boy.”

A few days later when she had recovered, Nicholas sent for her once more and thanked her for her herring and chicory with such generous gifts that her son was later considered one of the wealthiest men in Russia.

*“And that’s how it is in the world,” the gray old storyteller used to say, shaking his head. “It all depends on fate. For some people Nicholas’s excursions brought disaster, for others great happiness.”*




\* Under the “cantonist laws,” boys were forced to serve in the Russian army for twenty-five years. Jewish communities in Russia had special officers, dubbed *khapers* (snatchers(, for seizing male children—ages 12 to 25, and in exceptional cases as young as 8 or 10—who were incarcerated in a communal building and handed over to the military authorities to fill the cantonist quota. Russian authorities hoped also to alienate Jewish children from their own people and religion by means of this long army service