# ***The Shoemaker and the Shretelekh***



Some *shretelekh*, small elflike creatures, slipped into the home of a shoemaker and made themselves cozy there. At the time, the shoemaker was so poor that he had only enough leather to make a single pair of shoes. He cut the leather to the pattern and laid it on his worktable. Then, in confidence that the Lord would come to his aid somehow, he went to sleep. When he rose the next morning, imagine his astonishment at finding a completed pair of shoes! He examined the workmanship and saw that it was of the highest quality. He sold the shoes for enough money to buy leather for two more pairs. And the next morning there were two finished pairs of shoes on the table. When he sold them, he had enough money for four pairs. After he had cut out the leather this time, he and his wife decided that they would hide to discover who was making the shoes. And in the middle of the night they saw four tiny, handsome, raggedly dressed little men who sat down and began, each of them, to make a pair of shoes. The shoemaker was amazed at their speed. When they were finished, they put the shoes on the table and ran away. In the morning the shoemaker’s wife said, “Those little people have made us rich, and we must thank them. See how ragged they are; they must be cold. So let’s make them some clothes.”

When the couple had finished sewing four tiny suits of clothes, they hid once again to see what the little people would do. The *shretelekh* were astonished to find clothes instead of leather waiting for them. One of the little men, when he had put on a suit, began to clap his hands, and he sang,


*“Hey, don’t we look glorious*.

*No more shoemaking for us!”*


With that all four began to sing. Then, dancing on the table and chairs, they danced their way out of the house and into the street and were never seen again.

But the shoemaker and his wife continued to prosper right down to the last day of their lives.