# ***The Synagogue, the Church, and the Town Hall***



For a long while the Jews of Alik had been begging their nobleman to build them a synagogue, and the Christians had been pleading for a church. He, for his part, wanted to build a town hall.

Well, a day came when the nobleman was taken so ill that it seemed no one could cure him. So he made a vow to build a large and beautiful church. But he stayed as sick as ever; indeed, he grew weaker by the day. When he felt himself at his last gasp, he made a vow to build a large and beautiful synagogue. Lo and behold, he felt himself growing better at once.

After he was fully recovered, he began to think about which of his vows to keep first. If he built the church first, the Jews would take offense. If he built the synagogue first, he would provoke the Christians. If he followed his own wishes and built the town hall, the Jews and the Christians would both be angry. So he decided to have all three structures built simultaneously and to make them identical.

He hired a famous foreign architect and instructed him to erect the three buildings at exactly the same time, stone for stone. The architect drove three posts into the ground to indicate where the church, the synagogue, and the town hall were to be built. Then he stretched a rope from post to post and, balancing himself on it, went from one point to the other, laying brick after brick in sequence. As the buildings rose, he tied the rope higher and higher up the posts. And that was how he was able to build the three structures simultaneously.

They were the most beautiful buildings in the world, so beautiful that the nobleman, worried lest the architect construct others as wonderful somewhere else, had the posts cut down just as all three were finished. As a result the architect fell from the ropes and died.

When I visited Alik, I came upon an old church with remarkable architecture, but I did not see either a synagogue or a town hall. I was told that they had burned down some while ago.