# ***The Transmigrating Soul***



My grandfather bought the forest in Paluzh and ordered the peasants to cut down some trees. One day a group of children went to the forest to gather mushrooms. When they finished they ran off, having forgotten about one little girl so that they left her behind. The girl sat down to rest on the stump of a tree—and at that moment she began to cough, because a *gilgl* had entered into her.

At last she got home, and her family noticed that she coughed with the sound of a dog barking. When she was silent, the *gilgl* spoke; and when the *gilgl* spoke, she developed a goiter. The *gilgl* used to call the girl’s mother “Mother,” and they had to give him whatever he wanted. One day when he wanted milk, he said, “Mother, unless you give me milk, I’ll strangle your daughter. So bring me milk.” Another time when the girl’s mother was baking *khale*, the braided Sabbath bread, he said, “Mother, make *khale* for me, too. I want to eat some.”

One of my uncles told him one day, “You’ve got an awfully big mouth. You want everything.” This made the *gilgl* cry. Whenever they ordered him to leave the girl, he would say, “If you want me to leave, you’ll have to bring ten rabbis. But if you bring the Rabbi of Oshmen, one will be enough.”

My grandfather disguised himself and said, “I’m the Oshmen Rabbi, and I order you to leave this girl.”

The *gilgl* replied, “Some rabbi you are! You’re the one who bought the forest and sent a couple of huge peasants with axes into it to chop down trees. And they cut down the one I lived in so that I had to enter the girl.”

The *gilgl* told them that he had once transmigrated into a dog, a very quiet yellow dog that my father himself had seen. Then Gentile boys killed the dog, so the *gilgl* entered into a horse, but the horse died, so he entered into a tree. Then Shmuel-Yoysef of Paluzh bought the forest and had the tree cut down, after which the *gilgl* entered into the girl.

He tormented the girl so severely that finally they went to the Rabbi of Oshmen. And the rabbi quarreled with the *gilgl*, because the *gilgl* wanted to leave by the girl’s throat and the rabbi wanted him to leave through one of her little fingers. At last he did leave, and a great shot was heard. The story is told that before he went, he asked that candles be distributed for the sake of his soul. After that, the rabbi advised the family to sell the house and leave the town. They followed the rabbi’s advice and emigrated to America.