# ***The Blacksmith and the Horses with Human Hands***



In 1904 I arrived in Dorohobuzh, and in May I traveled from Horets to the station. We passed through a village called Visokoye, where there was a blacksmith who lived in a beautiful two-story house with a balcony and an orchard. Astonished by all this, I asked, “How did a blacksmith get to be so rich?” So they told me the following tale:

Once on a Shrovetide evening, there was a knocking on the smith’s door at midnight. He came out and a group of men asked him to shoe four horses. He didn’t want to, but they pleaded with him and promised that he would be well paid. He finally agreed, fired up his forge, and went to work.

When he took up one of the horses’ feet, it turned out not to be a hoof, but a human foot. Human feet and human hands! He was too terrified to go on, but the men stood over him and threatened him with whips as they ordered him to shoe the horses.

Trembling, he obeyed. When his work was done, they poured out a great pile of golden coins for him. He let the coins fall from one hand into the other, and the money was transformed into hot coals.

Just then it turned three in the morning and all the roosters began to crow. He looked around and saw nothing: no money, no coals, no people, no horses. He was so frightened that he fainted dead away.

In the blacksmith’s house the family noticed that the smithy had gone dark and silent. They too were afraid and, taking up torches, went out to see what was wrong. In the smithy they found the blacksmith lying unconscious. There was a pot filled with gold rubles by his side.

He has been a rich man from that time to this. The story is well known in Dorohobuzh, and when the peasants drink with the blacksmith, they always say, “The devil’s tricks don’t bother you!”