# ***The Unquiet Grave***



The grave of the great Rabbi Moses ben Israel Isserles, who was called the Rema, is in Cracow. Once there was a poor young man who went to the caretaker of the cemetery and asked to buy a plot near the Rema’s grave. At first the caretaker refused to sell him one because he thought these should be reserved for dignitaries, but then he began to think: “I’m an old man, after all, and I’m sure to die before him. So who’ll know whether I ever sold him the plot?” Reasoning thus, he finally accepted the man’s money for a plot near the Rema.

The very next day a death was reported—and it was that of the young man who had bought the plot. The caretaker was afraid to tell anyone what he had done, so he simply had the man buried in a different plot. Soon afterward the dead man’s ghost began to appear in the caretaker’s dreams, demanding the plot he had bought. Night after night the ghost disturbed the caretaker’s rest. Finally the caretaker decided to go to the rabbi with the whole story and to get his advice.

The rabbi said, “Tell the ghost that he can move to the other plot. A promise should not be broken.” So that’s what the caretaker told the ghost when it paid its next visit.

The following day it was observed that there was a new grave near the place where the Rema was buried. Meanwhile the grave of the recently buried man collapsed in on itself. Soon afterward a gravestone was placed on the unidentified new grave, reading, “Here lies a person unknown.”

It’s said that the gravestone can be seen there to this day.