# ***The Large Stone Synagogue of Berditshev***



In Berditshev—I believe it was in the days of Reb Levi Yitskhok of Berditshev—there lived a rabbi, a very holy man. Reb Liber was his name. He was a quiet, inward person fond of going out into the fields to pray. One day the nobleman of the town went by as Reb Liber was saying his prayers near a tree. Seeing someone standing rigidly under a tree in an open field, the count sent a guard to ask what he was doing. The rabbi made no response to the question. The count then ordered that the man be brought to him. The guard took the rabbi and escorted him forcibly to the carriage, but the rabbi did not reply no matter how often he was addressed. This so angered the nobleman that he ordered his men to give the rabbi thirty lashes. Reb Liber bore the punishment without so much as a sigh. When he was released, he went back to the tree and resumed his prayers. This astonished the nobleman, and he decided to wait in order to see what would come of it all. When Reb Liber finished his prayers, he went up to the count and said quietly, “Tell me, brother, what was it you wanted to ask? I’m ready to answer your question.”

Surprised, the nobleman said, “I want to ask two questions: First, why did you refuse to answer when I spoke to you before? And second, why do you call me ‘brother,’ since I’ve had you so cruelly beaten?”

Reb Liber replied, “I was unable to answer you because when you asked your questions, I was in the presence of the Lord of all Lords, and I was making an accounting to Him of my life in this world. So you see, I could not be interrupted. And I called you brother because all men are God’s children, and as children of the same Father they are then brothers.”

“But weren’t you inclined to hate me for having you beaten?”

“No. In fact, I pitied you.”

“Why?”

“Because it was not you who was beating me. It was God who was punishing me. And I pitied you because God had chosen you to be His instrument in a matter as dreadful as beating a fellow human.”

These words made a deep impression on the nobleman. He said, “I see that you are a pious man and I’m sorry I had you beaten. I beg you to pardon me and to give me a penance.”

“I pardon you freely. As for a penance, pledge that you will never henceforth raise a hand against a brother.”

“Does that include my peasants? Can’t I even beat them?”

“They too are the children of God, and your brothers.”

The nobleman gave his word. Then, to console Reb Liber for having had him beaten, he made this promise: “I will cause a synagogue to be built here on this spot where you prayed and where I had you beaten.”

And he kept his word. He had a great stone synagogue built, and when the town of Berditshev grew, that synagogue turned out to be in the very heart of the town.