# ***The Six-Pointed Homentash: A Purim Tale***



One day an imp of Ashmodai who lived in a village ran into a dense forest where the trees were a mile apart from each other. He went up to the first tree, where he saw a parrot. He went up to the second tree, where he saw a flea as big as a walnut. Well, if you have a nut, you crack it; and when you crack a nut, thirteen yards of cloth come out. If you have cloth, you become a merchant; and if you are a merchant, you travel to markets. When he got to the market, he saw a peasant woman and bought a turkey from her. He brought the goose home and roasted the chick. He asked his wife to make him an omelet with six eggs, so she made him a six-pointed *homentash*, and she was frightened and died. So he had to sit down to mourn her for seven days. So he sat down at seven and a half kopecks per month and did not have enough, so he added a bit. And if you have a bit, you take it to the synagogue.

Arriving at the synagogue, he saw three men quarreling. He asked, “Why are you quarreling? Why don’t you cast lots?”\* So they cast lots, which showed the Saturday before Passover as auspicious. On the Saturday before Passover, it’s a good deed, a *mitsve*, to put your foot in the oven. If you put your foot in the oven, you get dried out. If you get dried out, you pull on a sock. If you pull on a sock, you have to bite. And so he took bites out of the living and the dead. His dead wife said, “Why are you taking bites out of everyone? Why don’t you take a bite out of yourself?” So he began to take bites out of all the food. Food spills, and if it spills, you get the itch. And if you get the itch, you go to the doctor, who says, “Why should I guess? Let the rabbi guess. Let the rabbi hit on it.” So the rabbi struck the windowpane. And if you strike a windowpane, things get mushy. And if they get mushy, you get butter. And if you have butter, you spread it, and if you spread it, you drive off, and so he drove right into a huge mudhole, and if we ever get out of it, we’ll go on with this tale.




\* According to one theory, the Jewish holiday of Purim (which literally means “lots”( is related to the Babylonian New Year, on which day it was believed that one’s fate for the coming year—i.e., one’s lot—was sealed. This nonsense tale was told on Purim, hence the reference to “casting lots.”