# ***The Miracle of the Beer Keg***



My Shiye managed to save up sixty gildn. From time to time he would withdraw five or ten gildn, and I would keep track of how much was left. One day I took out twenty gildn, but when I counted what was left a few moments later, the whole amount was there. I counted once, I counted twice, and there they were: sixty gildn. So I told Shiye that he must have made a mistake. He counted the money once more. Still sixty gildn! “We’ve both made mistakes in counting,” I said, “or else you don’t remember how much money you put in.”

“Don’t be crazy,” he said.

“Come on,” I said, “I know how much I took out.” Well, what do you think? It was only after we mulled it over that we realized the money had been blessed. Evidently the good Lord on high had done a miraculous thing, and if the Lord wills it, prosperity comes in the door unbidden.

Yes, yes. Such things did happen. Wait. Would you like another instance? Didn’t something like it happen to me just before the war? You know, of course, that the holiday season is good for business. I manage to sell several barrels of beer and, with God’s help, some brandy. Good enough! One day I noticed that the cashbox was full and the beer and brandy barrels were filled to the top—though we had been drawing from one of them all day long. So I said to Shiye, “What’s going on? Usually the barrels are empty by now, yet you’ve been drawing from the same barrel all day long.”

It was then that I went up to the barrel to draw myself some beer. I said to Shiye, “I don’t believe it. Look, it’s still full.” Then I shook the barrel and—slap, slap. It was empty. Who knows? If I had kept my mouth shut and pretended not to notice, it might still—ah well. Would that the good Lord would do the same thing again.