# ***The Dibbuk Melody of Tolne***



In the town of Vishnevits the cantor was an older Jew and a disciple of the Rebbe of Tolne. Now, because his voice was beginning to fail, some of the congregation argued that it was time to get a new cantor. But they were opposed by the disciples of the Tolne Rebbe, and the result was that a small war developed over the issue.

It happened one day that the cantor’s voice turned very hoarse. And when his hoarseness persisted, even the disciples of the Tolne Rebbe conceded that it might be time to look for a new cantor.

As is the custom among Jews, they came to terms with the old cantor. They got his permission (given grudgingly, you may be sure, but what else could he do?( to hire another cantor, a young man who was pious as well as a fine musician. The whole town was delighted by the sweetness of his voice when he sang the prayers, and they respected him for his piety and his good character.

The deposed cantor, who could hardly bear to acknowledge the talent of his younger rival, regarded him with envy and hatred. At last, just at the time of the high holidays, grief made the old cantor desperately ill, and just before Rosh Hashana he was carried to his eternal rest.

Everyone mourned his passing. Some people, even those who most opposed him, felt that they had had some share in bringing on his death. As for the young cantor, he went about depressed and restless, like a man stumbling in the World of Chaos. He too felt that he had hastened the old cantor’s death.

Then misfortune struck him. On the beginning of the Jewish New Year, just as he was about to sing the *musef* prayers beginning with *hineni heoni mimaas*, “Here I stand poor in deeds,” he stood suddenly stock still, unable to remember the melody he had prepared for the words. He shut his eyes and searched his memory, without success. Not a trace of recall. Then the shade of the old cantor rose before his eyes, and the words *hineni heoni mimaas* rose from his throat. But not in his own voice, and not in the melody he had prepared; no, it was the melody the old cantor had sung for years. The congregation recognized the voice at once and knew, too, that the melody of the *hineni* was the old man’s.

The new cantor fainted away. Just as his assistants were lifting him, he came to. With uncanny strength he tore himself out of their grasp and rushed to the *bime*, where the angry voice of the old cantor came from his throat, crying, “I am still the town cantor. This is my pulpit and I will sing the *hineni* according to my melody.”

The young cantor, pale and faint, was led home and the *musef* service was conducted by a member of the congregation.

Soon after Rosh Hashana the young man was brought to Rebbe Dovidl in Tolne. Reb Dovidl took the cantor into his study and shut the door so they could be alone. “Now,” he said, “sing me the *hineni* with your melody.” The cantor sang, but what came out was the hoarse voice of the dead man, the old cantor.

Reb Dovidl said angrily, “A melody must be sweet and pleasant, and prayer too must be sweet, especially in the Days of Awe when one prays, ‘May it be Thy will, O mighty Lord, that my voice may neither falter nor turn hoarse; may it grow steadily stronger until it is like the clear sound of the *shoyfer*.’ He who leads the prayers must use his voice to persuade the Lord of the Universe. And to persuade Him one needs a better, a lovelier voice than yours is now. Go, then, back to your rest, and let this man, who stands in your place, pray to the Lord in his own fine voice so that he can plead with Him for the salvation of his people.”

There followed a long silence. Then Reb Dovidl spoke once more, this time without anger, in a gentle voice: “The two of you are both cantors. Now pay close attention to the *hineni*, which I will sing according to my own melody. Listen hard and learn it by heart, for your own good.”

With that Reb Dovidl began to sing the *hineni* in a clear voice and with a new melody which rose higher and clearer at every note he sang. Higher and higher, a song from the heart, at once sweet and ecstatic. And when Reb Dovidl finished with the words *shomeya tfile*, “Hear my prayer,” he lifted his tear-stained eyes, and with his hands outstretched said tenderly, “Now you, who are one of the purified dead, go back to your rest. The melody I’ve taught you will unbolt every door and open every gate for you, and you will achieve your soul’s repair. And I assure you that you will be found worthy to sing this very melody to the *tsadikim* in the Garden of Eden.”

Then Reb Dovidl went up to the young cantor and embraced him. Looking deep into his eyes, he said, “Now let’s both try to sing the *hineni* according to my melody. The old cantor is no longer here, and he will never again appear in your synagogue.”

Reb Dovidl began to sing his *hineni*, and the young cantor, his voice fully restored, and clearer, purer than it had ever been, sang along with him.

And this was the melody that for many years was sung by the Hasidim of Tolne. The melody they called the Dibbuk Melody of Tolne.