# ***The Missing Bridegroom***



There were two boys who were friends, and who always studied the Talmud together. Then it happened that one of them died. So the other was left to study alone. In time he grew up, and a marriage was arranged for him. Now, the custom is that the groom is not permitted to be alone on the day before the wedding, but since everyone was very busy, he slipped out of the house for a minute. He was no sooner outside than his childhood friend came up to him and said, “What are you doing?”

At first the groom was frightened, but then his fear left him and he replied that he was about to be married. His friend said, “Come with me and I’ll show you where I live.”

“How can I?” replied the groom. “I’m to be married tomorrow.”

“You can come for a moment,” replied the friend. He led the groom to the outskirts of town and into a very fine house. On a table lay a volume of the *gemore*. “Let’s see,” said the friend, “which of us is better at remembering our lessons.” And so they sat down to study, and they studied together for a hundred and fifty years.

When the hundred and fifty years were up, the groom left the house and headed back to the home of his prospective father-in-law. Everything was changed, however, and when he came to what had been the father-in-law’s house, he saw that it was altogether differently constructed. The people of the town, seeing him dressed in the style of a hundred and fifty years ago, laughed at him. When he went into the house and inquired for his bride, the occupants thought he was insane. But there was an old woman keeping warm near the oven who heard his questions and the names he gave. She told him that a hundred and fifty years ago, a young man had disappeared the day before his wedding. The groom, hearing that, understood what had happened and uttered a prayer to the Lord. And then he died.