# ***A Balshem Drives Out a Dibbuk***



This is a true story about a *balshem*, a wonder-worker. The eighty-year-old taleteller from whom I got it gave me the *balshem*’s family name—it was Zhuravitser.

There was a young man in our village who was very clever, but an idler. One day he disappeared, and no one knew what had become of him.

Five or six years later, my father had to travel to a *shtetl* in Volhynia on business. There he wanted to go to an inn, but the place was packed and the street outside was jammed with people trying to push their way in.

“What’s going on?” my father asked.

“There’s a *balshem* inside,” was the reply. “He’s giving out talismans against all sorts of sickness, and amulets to help women get pregnant.”

Just then the door of the inn opened and someone ran out right in front of my father. He was wearing a white satin coat, a waistband, and a fur-trimmed hat. My father looked closely at him and cried, “Moyshele, is that you? Are you the *balshem*?”

“Hush,” said the *balshem*. “Come with me. I’ll let you in on something.”

He seated my father on his wagon and they rode off to the home of a rich villager. The *balshem* had been summoned to drive a dibbuk out of this villager’s daughter, who was unable to sleep at night and kept shrieking that there was a demon in her featherbed.

When they arrived, the *balshem* asked to be taken to the young woman’s room. Then he sent everyone out so that, as he said, he could practice the discipline of seclusion. Those who eavesdropped at the door could hear him chanting phrases from the Cabala.

Suddenly all was silent. The door opened and there stood the *balshem*. He asked the rich villager to bring him a yellow cat and a small container of pitch. After much searching, a yellow cat and some pitch were found and given to him. Then he shut himself into the room once more, but this time he had my father with him.

He took the cat and smeared it with the pitch. Then he cut open one end of the featherbed and inserted the cat. That done, he opened the door and ordered that the young woman’s bed be carried to the edge of a nearby wood.

When his instructions had been followed, he said, “Wait. Very soon I’ll drive the demon out of your daughter.” Taking a glass of water into which he had poured effervescent powders, he began to mutter incantations, all the while making faces, spitting and whispering. The water in the glass fizzed and bubbled. The Volhynia by-standers, who had never seen such powders, trembled at the dreadful signs.

It was then that the *balshem* took his stick and began to beat on the feather bed. There was a terrible screeching and out sprang the cat. At the sight of the strange black creature, feathered all over, that leaped yowling out of the featherbed, the awed bystanders cried, “Hear, O Israel.”

The young woman, seeing that the demon had fled, grew calm and from then on was able to sleep at night. Soon she recovered her health. Of course, the *balshem* was well rewarded and stood generous treat to my father, who confessed that no real *balshem* could have invented a more effective way of driving out a demon than Moyshele.

At which both he and Moyshele doubled over with laughter.