# ***The Last Dibbuk***



The town of Lashkovits had never, absolutely never, had a day like that Yom Kippur.

In the synagogue the congregation was finishing the *musef* prayers, though in fact most of the assembly had already dispersed, leaving only the pious old men.

The Rebbe of Lashkovits, the last descendant of Reb Meyerl of Premishlan, stood before the Holy Ark. Wearing his prayer shawl and his white linen overgarment, he prayed passionately, imploring the Lord to come to his aid for the sake of his holy grandfather, Reb Meyerl.

For some while now a murmur like the lapping of waves had been audible from the town square behind the synagogue. Hundreds of people, adults and children, from Tshortkev, Butshatsh, Otenyi, Proshove, and even from Tarnopol, had come to witness the duel between the holy Rebbe of Lashkovits and Mekhele Volakh of Tshortkev, the heretic follower of Rabbi Shapira.

Today the whole world would discover whose was the greater power: that of the holy faith or that of the heretics (may the Lord have mercy on them). This, anyhow, is what the pious followers of Reb Aryele-Leyb of Lashkovits were thinking and saying.

Opposing them were the Shapiraniks, the disciples of the Enlightenment and the admirers of Mekhele Volakh, who had dared to challenge the Rebbe of Lashkovits to a duel. They maintained that the duel would reveal whether the forces of darkness and superstition or the forces of light and reason had the greater power.

But the members of those two parties were but as drops of water in the ocean compared with the mob of the simply curious. In the interval after the *musef* service and the beginning of *nile*, the crowd that had gathered in the square would see the great Rebbe attempt to drive a dibbuk out of a woman and into the mouth of the heretic, Mekhele Volakh.

The cantor finished reciting the *musef* service. Not a soul was left in the synagogue except Reb Aryele and several old men in their customary places by the East Wall, who did not want to abandon him. From the alcove in which Reb Uryele stood came the fearful sounds of his prayers, which were then echoed by the groans of the old women who were still in the women’s section.

Out in the open square, the impatient thousand-headed mob waited, growing larger minute by minute. Not an infant lay in its cradle. Everyone was in the square: Jews, non-Jews, peasants of every age and sex from all the nearby towns.

Standing at the center of the square was Mekhele Volakh, a smallish man with a graying yellow beard. As usual, an ironic smile played on his lips, though now it had taken on determination as well. In his gray eyes glowed the heroic light that one sees in the eyes of someone who, certain of victory, is prepared to fling himself into bitter conflict.

Mekhele Volakh was a simple sort of man. An innkeeper. Not many years ago he had been a Hasid who made fun of Rabbi Shapira and the Shapiraniks. Then suddenly—and no one knew why—he visited Rabbi Shapira. He read his pamphlets and the journal *Hamagid*, and in time he became one of the rabbi’s most devoted followers, ready to walk through fire and water for the sake of the Enlightenment.

In the pages of *Hamagid* Mekhele had read how the Lashkovits “saint” was sending out letters to all parts of the world in which he claimed to heal all sorts of illnesses. The Lashkovits Rebbe asserted, furthermore, that he had a particular talent for driving out dibbuks from the bodies of their victims. Because of his skill, hundreds and hundreds of afflicted women and maidens had recovered their health. Mekhele found what he read intensely interesting and undertook to investigate what was going on in Lashkovits.

It happened that he had relatives there, who told him that in the matter of dibbuks, the Rebbe had his hands full. Lashkovits seemed to be full of dibbuks just then. There was a regular epidemic of possessed women and maidens who came to Lashkovits from towns and villages throughout the region. The word “dibbuk” and the reports of the wonders performed by the Rebbe filled the air.

And it was then that Mekhele decided to take a hand in the matter. He went first to Rabbi Shapira and described his plan: he would challenge the Lashkovits “saint” to a duel. He would “sanctify the Name” of the Enlightenment by exposing the Lashkovits Rebbe’s deceit and chicanery.

Rabbi Shapira tried to dissuade him, saying that truth did not require uproar and frenzy to prevail. It went silently and moderately about its work. In any case, deceit would not endure for much longer, because darkness must fly from the oncoming victory of light. But Mekhele refused to be guided.

Mekhele asked his relatives in Lashkovits to convey the following message to the Rebbe: “I, Mekhele, the Shapiranik, the *maskl*, have contempt for your dibbuks. I say that it is all a tissue of lies designed to mislead people and separate them from their money. And if the Rebbe holds that the tales of dibbuks are true, then let him demonstrate that truth to the world. If he can drive a dibbuk *out* of someone, he ought to be able to drive one *into* someone else. And I, Mekhele, am prepared to receive such a dibbuk. If the Rebbe believes he has the powers he claims, then let him name a day and let him show the world what he can do.”

Mekhele’s relatives delivered his challenge. Meanwhile, the story of what Mekhele had done spread throughout Tshortkev and Lashkovits and to all the towns and villages in the region. It was said that the court of the Tshortkev Rebbe tacitly encouraged Mekhele, perhaps because it was envious of the pomp with which the Lashkovits court was conducted, or perhaps because the Tshortkev Rebbe’s followers were too aristocratic for such crude miracles as driving out dibbuks.

In either case, the truth is that the Tshortkev court warned the Lashkovits Rebbe not to embroil himself in a battle with the heretics. But it was already too late for the Rebbe to back out. He had to pick up the gauntlet that had been flung down. Meanwhile he treated the matter with the utmost seriousness, hoping thereby to frighten his foe. Indeed, the Rebbe actually consulted a lawyer to ask whether he could be sued if the dibbuk should kill Mekhele Volakh. The lawyer replied that the law books were silent on the subject of murders committed by word of mouth.



Then, through the intercession of various persons, in particular several of Mekhele’s relatives, the Rebbe sought to warn Mekhele of the dire consequences of his challenge. But Mekhele was not to be put off. He was afraid of nothing.

So the Rebbe of Lashkovits deliberately set Yom Kippur as the day for the duel. And he chose precisely the time just before *nile* when every Jew stands most in fear of the Day of Judgment, the time when everyone’s fate is about to be sealed. But that did not frighten Mekhele either. And now the duel was about to take place.

In the middle of the square stood the invisible dibbuk, hidden inside a woman who howled and grimaced and flung her arms and her head about as she cast venomous glances in Mekhele’s direction. From time to time she lunged at him as if she meant to tear him to bits with tooth and claw. Mekhele, however, stood unmoved. He showed her his fist and said, “Keep your hands to yourself, you shrew. You’re nothing but a charlatan.”

At last the Rebbe, wearing his *talis* and his *kitl*, the white linen robe worn on solemn occasions, came out of the synagogue. With his eyes wide he walked slowly, solemnly, casting stern glances in Mekhele’s direction as he made his way to the middle of the square.

As the crowd parted for the Rebbe, there was a sudden mass movement, as if everyone had shuddered at the same time. The now silent crowd hardly breathed. It was as if the human wave had congealed.

The Rebbe stopped and turned his penetrating eyes on Mekhele, his mortal enemy. The Rebbe’s thick, dark eyebrows rose like thunderclouds. With an intonation that was at once gentle and threatening he addressed his foe: “You! Listen. Not many minutes ago we invoked God’s name as we prayed, ‘Turn, turn from your wicked ways. May the evildoer turn from his path and the sinner from his vicious thoughts.’ Hear me, heretic, today is a day for repentance. A day for begging pardon. Now I warn you, Mekhele, you evildoer, heretic … repent—repent for one day, for one hour before your death. The Lord is a God of mercy. And I too will forgive you.”

But Mekhele, his stance assured and impudent, his lips twisted into a contemptuous smile, turned to face the Rebbe. After a brief glance at the crowd, he said, his voice perfectly controlled, “Do your worst. I haven’t come to hear your warnings. I’m here to expose you for the fraud that you are. See, I’ve opened my mouth. Now, drive the dibbuk into me—if you can.”

A murmur swept through the crowd. The human wave shuddered once more. Cries of “Heretic! Convert! Apostate!” were heard here and there. But a fierce hush from the majority restored silence.

For one instant the Rebbe could be seen to tremble. He lowered his head, and raised it again. Then, with a fierce gesture, he stretched his right arm out toward the possessed woman who was writhing, squealing, and lunging wildly toward him. “Silence, wicked one!” he cried. “Do you hear what I say? My decree is that you shall leave the woman through the little finger of her left hand, and enter into that man who is as wicked as you are.”

Again came a murmuring, but it stopped almost immediately. The eyes of everyone turned fearfully toward Mekhele.

For his part, he seemed indifferent to the gaze of those thousands. He smiled more scornfully than ever, stuck out his tongue at the possessed woman, and called, “Well? What are you waiting for?”

One minute passed; a second; a third. Mekhele, the Rebbe, and the possessed woman maintained their poses as they exchanged looks of hatred. More minutes went by. A quarter of an hour.

The increasingly restless crowd looked toward the Rebbe, who had by now turned pale. His eyes were glazed, his hands hung at his sides.

Mekhele was the first to move. He straightened up, then, seizing his coattails, turned so that he stood with his back to the Rebbe. Bending slightly, he cried, “Let him kiss my …”

And left the square.

Slowly, wearily, the crowd, as if it had been whipped, crept back into the synagogue for the *nile* service. The congregation felt as if this were Tisha b’Av, and not Yom Kippur.\* As for the Rebbe, he said not another word. He sat in his seat with tears streaming down his face. When the service was over, he shut himself inside his house and did not leave it or even speak to anyone for two years. He lived withdrawn and abandoned, and at the end of the two years, he died. With his death the line of Reb Meyerl of Premishlan came to its end.

And from that Yom Kippur on, no more dibbuks appeared in Galicia. Mekhele Volakh had driven them away for good.


\* Yom Kippur is a day of personal as well as communal repentance. According to tradition, it is a day of anxiety, because one’s fate for the coming year is then sealed. Tisha b’Av, however, is a day of mourning for the destruction of the First and Second Temples in Jerusalem. The implication in this story is that the congregation felt as if a national disaster had just occurred.