# ***Clever Khashinke and Foolish Bashinke***



There was a woman who had two daughters, one clever and the other foolish. The clever one was called Khashinke, and the foolish one was Bashinke. The mother preferred the clever daughter to the foolish one and finally drove the foolish one from the house.

The foolish daughter walked and walked and walked, until she came to a little pear tree. The pear tree said, “Why are you crying?”

Bashinke said, “Because my mother drove me away from home.”

The pear tree said, “Shake my branches, then you’ll have a measure of pears, and I’ll have a measure.”

So she did, and took away her measure of pears. She walked on, still crying and crying, until she saw a little cow. The little cow said, “Why are you crying?”

“Because my mother drove me away from home,” said Bashinke.

The little cow said, “Well, milk me and then you’ll have a quart of milk, and I’ll have a quart.”

So she did, and went on her way, crying and crying until she saw a kneading trough filled with flour. “Why are you crying?” asked the kneading trough.

“Because my mother drove me away from home,” replied Bashinke.

The kneading trough said, “Take my flour. Knead it and bake it. That way you’ll have a loaf of bread, and I’ll have a loaf.”

So she did. And now she had bread and milk and pears, all of which she ate. Then she lay down to sleep.

When she woke the next morning, she walked on, still crying, till she came to a little hut, where she found an old granny. And the old *bobetske* said to her, “Why are you crying, girl?”

“Because my mother drove me away from home,” said Bashinke.

“Why did she do that?” asked the *bobetske*.

“Because she says I’m foolish. And I have a sister who’s clever,and my mother loves her and hates me. That’s why she drove me away from home.”

“In that case,” said the *bobetske*, “just wait a minute. I’ll fix things so your mother will care for you.” The old woman spread out a sheet and threw all sorts of good things on it: candies and cookies, gold and silver. Then she tied the sheet up and said, “Take that home to your mother.”

Bashinke carried the good things home with her, stood in front of the house, and cried, “Mother, Mother, open the door.”

“The plague take you,” came the reply. “Be off!”

Bashinke, seeing that her mother would not open the door, called, “Mother, I’ve brought you all sorts of good things.”

When her mother heard that Bashinke had brought all sorts of good things, she opened the door at once and let her in. And when she untied the sheet, her eyes were dazzled by the brightness of the gold and silver and everything else. “Ah, ah, what wonderful things!” she said. “Where did you get them?”

Bashinke told her about the old *bobetske* who lived in the little hut. “Ah,” thought her mother, “if Bashinke, who is a fool, could bring such wonderful things, just think what my clever Khashinke will bring.” And she drove her clever daughter from the house so that she too would come home bearing all sorts of good things.

Khashinke walked and walked until she came to the little hut. She went in, crying. The old *bobetske* sitting there asked, “Why are you crying?”

Khashinke said, “Because my mother has driven me out of the house so that I too can bring back all sorts of good things.”

“Ah,” said the old woman, “she drove you from the house so that you can bring her good things? She likes good things, does she? Well, then,” she said, “I’ll send her good things.” With that she spread a sheet out on the floor and oh, the good things she threw on it. Alas and alack: snakes and frogs and mice and cats—and more. Then she tied them all up and gave the bundle to Khashinke, saying, “Here, take these good things home to your mother.”

And that’s what Khashinke did. When she got home, she called, “Mother, let me in.”

Her mother ran eagerly to the door and Khashinke came in. No sooner had she set her bundle down than the snakes and the frogs and the mice and the cats began to leap up into her mother’s face. Her mother screamed, “Oh, the devil take you. What have you brought me? Oh, Lord, what will I do? What will I do? Help! People, save me! I feel sick.”

A crowd came running into the house and stood around staring at her. Finally the mother gave Khashinke a good beating and drove her away from home.

Foolish Bashinke was now the clever one, while the clever Khashinke went away like a fool and disappeared.