# ***The Granny Bear***



Once upon a time there was a granny bear whose children, all ten of them, loved to eat *farfl* with beans. One day the granny bear cooked up a pot *farfl* with beans, then went off to the forest to gather wood. As soon as she was gone, her children ate all the *farfl* and beans in the pot. And when they were done, they were afraid that the granny bear would spank them for it.

This is what they did: they took a towel and stuck it full of needles, because they knew that when the granny bear came home, the first thing she always did was to wash and dry her hands.

Then the children all hid. One hid in the closet while another crawled under the closet. One climbed on top of the clock while another crawled under the clock. One got into a chest while another crawled on top of the chest. One got into a cubbyhole while another crawled under the cubbyhole.

When the granny bear came home from the forest, she knocked at the door, but no one answered. “Children, children,” she called, “open the door.” But the door stayed shut. Again she cried, “Children, children, open the door. I’ll give you some piping hot *farfl* and beans.”

When the children heard the words *farfl* and beans, they came out of hiding and opened the door for the granny bear. “Granny Bear, Granny Bear,” they said, “wash and dry your hands.” And the granny bear did. She washed up, and when she wiped her hands on the towel they got so badly stuck by the pins that she couldn’t spank the children.