# ***Next Times That’s What I’ll Say***



Once upon a time there was a king who had two sons, one of whom was a fool while the other was clever. One day the king called his sons to him and said, “It’s time that you both learned some profession or skill. You can’t spend your lives doing nothing. So now, each of you tell me what you would like to learn.”

The clever son promptly said, “I want to learn every skill there is.”

“And you?” said the king to his foolish son.

“Well,” said the fool, “I want to wash clothes in the river.”

“Good,” said the king. “Washing clothes is also a skill.”

The king gave each of them money and the sons went away, the clever one to study and the foolish one to the river.

The fool stood beside the river and washed clothes. He washed and washed and washed. All at once one of the socks he was washing floated away and disappeared. So he crossed over to the other bank to look for it. There he ran about and ran about until he met a postman. “Listen,” he said, “have you seen a sock, by chance?”

The irritated postman, unaware that this was the king’s son, slapped his cheek so hard that it swelled up like a round loaf. The boy ran crying to the king, “Father, I was washing clothes in the river and a sock floated away. So I asked the postman if he had seen it, and he made my cheek swell like this.”

The king thought, “A fool is a source of grief, and yet he must be taught wisdom.” So he said, “My son, if it happens again that you meet a postman, take your hat off and say to him, ‘Good morning, Mr. Postman, have you perhaps seen my sock?’ ”

“Good,” said the fool. “Next time that’s what I’ll say.”

So he walked and he walked and he walked until he passed a house where a wedding was taking place. He went inside. There, he took his hat off and said to the groom, “Good morning, Mr. Postman. Have you perhaps seen my sock?” The groom and the assembled relatives stared at him as if he was mad. “Postman! Who? Sock? What, where?” So they grabbed him and beat him well, after which they threw him out of the house.

Away he went, crying to the king, “Father, I’ve been to a wedding where I said, ‘Good morning, Mr. Postman, have you perhaps seen my sock?’ And oh, how they beat me up!”

The king thought, “A fool is a source of grief, and yet he must be taught wisdom.” And so he said, “My son, if you’re ever at a wedding again, drop a coin on a plate and dance with everyone.”

“Good,” said the fool, “that’s what I’ll do if it happens again.” And he went off once more.

He went on and on until he saw a house that was burning—a huge conflagration. He ran into the burning house, threw a coin on a plate, and started to dance. When the firemen saw what he was doing, they burst out laughing and doused him from head to foot with the firehose. He ran to the king crying, “Father, I saw a house burning, and I went in and threw a coin on a plate and began to dance. When the firemen saw me, they doused me with their hose.”

Hearing that, the king grew sad. “Now pay attention. If it happens again, don’t be a fool. If you see a fire, grab a bucket of water and put it out.”

“Good,” said the fool, “that’s what I’ll do.” And away he went again.

The morning after his beating, the fool was walking in the street when he saw a woman carrying a basketful of steaming-hot rolls. Thinking that they were on fire, he grabbed up a pail of water and flung it over them. The woman slapped him silly and snatched his hat from his head. Hatless, the fool ran to the king, crying, “Father, I saw a woman carrying rolls that were steaming, so I took a bucket of water and poured it over them. Then she slapped me silly and snatched my hat from my head.”

Now the king grew angry and shouted, “You fool. If you see a poor woman carrying rolls, you buy a roll for a kopeck.”

“Good,” said the fool, “that’s what I’ll do next time.” And away he went.

He went on and on until he saw a soldier scratching about in the dirt. So he said to the soldier, “Sell me a kopeck’s worth.”

“With the greatest pleasure in the world. Why, for a kopeck, I’ll sell you a whole wagonload.”

The delighted fool ran home to the king, crying, “Oh Father, what a terrific bargain I’ve just made.” Then he told his father what the soldier had said. Hearing this, the king was now well and truly angry and drove his son out of the house.