# ***The Naughty Little Girl***



Once upon a time there was an old crone who lived all alone in a hut in an open field, and she used to take in naughty children who would not obey their parents. One day a mother gave the crone her naughty daughter and said, “Teach her to be obedient.” The crone took the little girl with her, and they went off into the forest to gather kindling.

Meanwhile a bear came to the old crone’s hut and began to turn around and around. As he was turning around and around, a dog came up and asked him, “Bear, why are you turning like that?”

“What difference does it make?” said the bear. “Why don’t you turn too?” Then both of them turned around and around, and as they were turning, along came a stag that said, “Hey, bear, hey, dog, why are you turning like that?”



They said, “What difference does it make? Why don’t you turn too?” Then all three of them turned around and around, and as they were turning, along came a rooster and said, “Hey, bear and dog and stag, why are you turning like that?”

They said, “What difference does it make? Why don’t you turn too?” Then all five of them turned around and around, and as they were turning, along came a bit of pitch and a pin and said, “Hey, bear and dog and stag and rooster and teapot cover, why are you turning like that?”

They said, “What difference does it make? Why don’t you turn too?” Then all seven of them turned around and around until night fell and it was time for them to go to sleep.

Well, where should they sleep? Inside the old crone’s hut. So they went inside and each of them found a place to sleep. The bear lay down in the bed, the dog in the cradle, the stag on the oven, the rooster on a shelf, the teapot cover in the chimney, the bit of pitch inside a box of matches, and the pin, unable to find anyplace else, stuck himself into a towel.

When the crone and the little girl came back from the forest, they wanted to go to sleep. They went to the bed, and the bear kicked out at them and frightened them so that they sprang away. They tried to lie down in the cradle, and the dog bit them. “Ouch, ouch,” they cried, “what’s going on here?”

Next they tried to lie down on the oven, but the stag threatened them with his horns and made them tremble and turn cold with fear. The crone went to the oven to warm herself, but the teapot cover fell out of the chimney and struck her hand. Frightened, the crone cried out, “Woe is me. What’s going on here?” Meaning to light the lamp so that she could see what was happening, she opened the matchbox to take out a match, but the bit of pitch stuck so tightly to her fingers she couldn’t shake it off. So she washed her hands to get rid of the pitch. Then she reached for the towel, but the pin pricked her so hard she began to yell. The rooster, hearing her, yelled back, “You don’t scare me.” When the crone heard that, she was so frightened she dropped dead on the spot.

The little girl, meanwhile, ran from the hut and all the way home to her mother. From then on she was an obedient child and did everything her mother told her to do. And afterward, children everywhere obeyed their mothers.




 


We children loved it when mother told us wonder tales. She was always busy helping to earn the family’s living, but on *shabes* she had time. At dusk, before it was permitted to light candles and say the prayers that ended the Sabbath and ushered in the more prosaic week, we used to gather around her and ask her to tell us a wonder tale. Sometimes she told us a tale about a snake. Sometimes it was about a forest child or a princess …

—Memoir from a Lithuanian *shtetl*, the turn of         
the century                           


*I*n Yiddish the genre of fairy tales, or *märchen*, is called *vunder-mayses*, literally “wonder tales.” They are rich with supernatural figures and things: helpers, like *Elyohu hanovi*, Elijah the Prophet, who stand in for the fairy godmothers of the folktales of other cultures; hinderers like devils, sorcerers, and the witch Bobe Ha, who must be a relative of Baba Yaga; magical objects like enchanted rings, golden feathers, and glass mountains. The time and place are indefinite (“once upon a time,” “in a city”(; the heroes and heroines are unnamed (“there was a young girl,” “a rabbi,” “a princess”(. These tales generally contain a series of episodes told as a string of events, or, in the more complex tales, as a revolving stage (“now we leave the heroine and return to the hero”(. Wonder tales clearly don’t mean to command our belief, though there is a Hasidic view that they may veil mystical secrets of the greatest importance. (According to Reb Nakhman of Bratslav, “The fairy tales of the world may hold many hidden and exalted things, but they have become distorted because they are deficient and people have become confused and no longer tell them properly.”1(

The standard introduction *amol iz geven*, “once upon a time …,” reminds listeners that the story is a fictitious one. A rhymed ending, recited with tongue in cheek, was also a common device to signal that this was a flight of fancy, a *bobe-mayse*:


*I too was there*

*And had a good little glass of brandy*.

*From my beard it dripped*

*But none I sipped*.


The vast majority of the wonder tales tell about a young woman or man who leaves home and has many adventures. Such tales frequently end with a lavish celebration of marriage. Just as the *kinder-mayselekh* of the previous section represent the fears and challenges of early childhood, the wonder tales dramatize the problems and perils of young adulthood. In a sense they chart the course to maturity. Typically, fairy tale heroes and heroines must confront a number of adversaries: mean parents, stepparents, or siblings; witches, demons, or sorcerers. More specifically, they must overcome a lack—of money or a profession, of a parent or mate. In “Forty Hares and a Princess” and “The Orphan Boys,” the heroes lack status in the community, while in “The Orphan Boy Who Won the Bride,” the hero lacks traditional Jewish learning. By the end of the tale the challenges are met, the needs are satisfied, and the heroines and heroes live happily ever after.

A smaller group of wonder tales uses the magical settings of the fairy tale world for more spiritually edifying purposes. These pious, didactic wonder tales combine marvelous transformations with religious motifs drawn from the Cabalistic and Midrashic literature.

Certainly a tale like “The Orphan Boy Who Won the Bride,” though on the surface a male Cinderella tale, owes much of its power to the imagery of prophecy and redemption with which it is studded. The story of a Jewish boy raised by a gentile nobleman recalls the early life of Moses. The Jews wandering in the desert after the flight from Egypt, and Moses receiving the Ten Commandments are figured in the episodes of the Congealed Sea and the island where the boy finds stones on which beautiful writing has been inscribed. Finally there is the climactic wedding scene in which a favorite theme of the Cabalists is replayed: the mystical marriage between the masculine and feminine emanations of God, the *eyn sof* and *shkhine*. In the mystical tradition, it is that union that will precede the coming of the Messiah.

But for the most part, the stories in this section have no specific cultural markers except for linguistic and stylistic ones. They were told in Yiddish by East European Jews and share features, such as formulaic beginnings and endings, with other Yiddish tales that are more culturally colored. Some may represent recent adaptations of stories learned from Polish or Russian ethnic neighbors with whom there was a tradition of story swapping. As one Yiddish scholar points out: “There were at least two large areas in which the interaction of the Yiddish and the Slavic speech communities assumed what may be called mass proportions: the Jewish nurseries in the towns, and the huts of the peasants where Jewish artisans would spend the whole week among their customers, to return to their home town on the eve of the Sabbath.”2

The inclusion of a Yiddish proverb or a citation from the Bible, Talmud, or Book of Prayers was one way of turning a universal story into a Jewish tale. For example, the theme “the king’s haughtiness punished” is widely known throughout folktale literature. In the Yiddish variant, “The Beggar King and the *Melamed*,” the teller includes a passage from the morning prayer *Ezras Avoseynu* (God topples the haughty(, converting the story into a pious wonder-tale that illustrates the passage. One can postulate that only stories that felt culturally “right” in form and content were translated into Yiddish by Jewish storytellers. But in time, and after successive retellings, they began to sound and feel like traditional Yiddish folktales.

Borrowing—selective borrowing, to be sure—went both ways: from Slavs to their Jewish neighbors and from Jews to their Slavic neighbors. The great Romantic poet of Poland, Adam Mickiewicz (1788–1856(, is said to have praised a certain Jewish coachman, with whom he had traveled for two days, as an exquisite storyteller. Coachmen and shoemakers, peddlers and cattle dealers, loggers and beggars, merchants and innkeepers were some of the many Jewish raconteurs who played a significant role in the story-swapping tradition.