# ***Hang the Mean on My Palace Roof***



Once upon a time there was an old fisherman who lived with his wife in a little hut beside the sea. As he was fishing one day, he caught a duck that swam by and took it home to his wife.

Some time later the duck laid a brass egg. The man took the egg to the *porets*, the local squire, who gave him a kopeck for it. The fisherman was very pleased. A while later the duck laid a silver egg. Again the man took the egg to the squire, who this time gave him two kopecks. Later still, the duck laid a golden egg. The man took the egg to the squire, who said, “Fisherman, sell me the duck; I’ll give you a rendl for it.”

Now, a rendl was a gold coin worth more than the fisherman could make in a lifetime, but he wasn’t sure he necessarily wanted to sell a duck that lays golden eggs. So he said, “Let me talk it over with my wife.”

His wife said, “You’d better sell him the duck for a rendl. Otherwise, since he’s the squire, he’s likely to take it from us.” So the man took the duck to the squire, who gave him a rendl for it.

The squire looked the duck over and noticed that there were some blue markings under its right wing. But he couldn’t read them, so he sent for the priest, who looked at the blue markings and read aloud: “ ‘He who eats the liver of this duck will become king. And he who eats the right wing will become the viceroy.’ ”

So the squire had the duck killed and its liver and right wing put into a pot to cook. And he sat stroking his belly while he waited for the precious meal.

But the squire’s two sons, both of them terribly hungry, ran into the kitchen and saw the pot cooking. They lifted the cover, and the older son snatched up the liver and ate it while the younger son ate the wing. Just then the cook came in to dish up the meal. Finding that it had been eaten, he roared, “Who did this?” The children replied, “We did.”

The cook hurried to the squire and fell on his knees. “Your two sons ate the dish I was making for you.” The squire was furious and sent for the priest to ask his advice.

The priest said, “Order your sons to be killed and eat their livers. That way you’ll get to be king.” So the squire sent for the cook and said, “I want you to kill my sons and roast their livers.” The cook fell on his knees and begged, “Oh Lord, have pity on your own children.” But the squire ordered the cook whipped, and finally the cook agreed to do it.

At night when the children were sleeping, the cook went into their room with a huge knife and a sharpening stone. He stood there sharpening the knife, sharpening and sharpening as the tears rolled down his cheeks. The sound of the knife on the stone woke them, and they saw him sharpening and weeping.

“Why are you crying?” they asked.

“Because the squire has commanded me to kill you and cook your livers for him to eat.”

The older boy said, “Have pity on us! Why don’t you let us go and kill our dogs? Let Father eat their livers.”

So the cook killed and buried the dogs and carried their livers to the squire. As for the boys, they jumped out of the window and ran away.

They traveled on and on and on until they came to a large city. There they went from street to street looking for some way to earn their living. As they passed an open window, they saw a tailor. “Little tailor, little tailor,” they said, “can you help us earn our clothes and food?”

The tailor replied, “Take needles and thread, scissors and pressing irons. Help me to cut and sew, to baste and press clothes, and then I’ll feed and clothe you.” So the boys took up needles and thread, scissors and pressing irons, and helped the tailor to cut and sew, to baste hems and press clothes. They became good apprentice tailors.

One day the king died. And the king’s daughter announced: “I will marry the strongest and cleverest man in the country.” So all the strongest men in the country were sent for, and a great wrestling contest was held. A very strong man from the other side of the *hore khoyshekh*, the Mountains of Darkness, defeated everyone until the two tailor’s apprentices came along. Everyone laughed at them, but the older apprentice wrestled with the champion and beat him. Then the younger apprentice wrestled with all the other strong men and defeated them.

To choose between the two winners, the princess ordered fifty candles lighted in a row. She said that whichever apprentice could blow out the candles with a single breath would be her husband. Both brothers, however, blew them out in a single breath. Next the princess said to the older apprentice, “Take the moon out of the sky and hang it from the tip of the palace roof.”

He replied, “First braid me a rope of sand so I can use it to hang the moon from the tip of the palace roof.”

The princess said to the younger apprentice, “Go up to the sun and bring back one of its coals so I can use it to heat my oven.”

He replied, “Harness the wind to your chariot so I can use it to drive up to the sun for a coal to heat your oven.”

The princess said to the older apprentice, “Sew me a dress without any seam.”

He replied, “Give me a length of silk made of smoke, and I’ll sew you a dress without a seam.”

The princess said to the younger apprentice, “Sew me a coat without taking my measurements.”

He replied, “Give me an endless length of thread and I’ll sew you a coat without taking your measurements.”

Well, the princess still didn’t know which of the two to marry. So they cast lots for her, and the lot fell to the older apprentice. He became the king, and his brother was made the viceroy.

One day the king said to the viceroy, “Let’s take a trip back to our old home and see what’s going on there.”

“A good idea,” the viceroy said.

They wore shabby clothing over their royal garments, and stuck needles and threads into their lapels. They took shears and pressing irons with them and rode away to the village of their father, the squire.

They arrived in the evening and asked for a place to sleep. They were told, “You can sleep in the kitchen behind the oven.” To which they replied, “Good.” Just then the squire sent for them, and the brothers were taken to a room where their father was sitting with the priest and a group of noblemen.

The squire said, “Tailor boys, tell us an interesting tale.”

So they began the story of a magic duck and related all that had happened to them from the time when they ate its liver and wing to the time when the older brother became king and the younger one became the viceroy. And when they had finished their tale, they threw off their ragged clothes and stood revealed in their imperial garments. Everyone fell to his knees before them and bowed down.

The squire and the priest were beheaded, while the cook was taken with great honor to the royal palace and made prime minister.


*From that day to this*

*They have lived content*

*And have never again*

*Known any want*.