# ***The Sorcerer’s Apprentice***



Once a rich man who had no children went to consult a wonder rebbe. The rebbe said, “You were born with either of two fates: you can be rich, or you can have children. It’s up to you. If you have children, you’ll have to be poor. Choose.”

The man replied, “I prefer to have a child.”

The rebbe said, “Go back home. In nine months your wife will give birth to a son.” A few months after he returned home, all the man’s goods were destroyed in a fire and he became poor. And in nine months, his wife gave birth to a son.

The family struggled for thirteen years to keep their home together. Then, seeing that nothing could be done about their poverty in that town, the father and son decided to beg their way in the wide world. They went from town to town until finally they arrived at the city of Odessa.

In Odessa, they went to the House of Beggars, where all the poor folk seemed to be delighted by something. The father asked them, “What makes you all so happy?”

“Don’t you know?” they said. “There’s a rich man in town who makes a banquet for poor folk once a week. If you like, you can come too.”

So the father and son went to the banquet and had plenty to eat and drink, the best of everything. At one point a coach drawn by four beautiful horses drove up. A sorcerer stepped out and began to astonish the guests by turning himself into a horse, then an elephant, then a lion, then a cat. He kept the company entertained until two o’clock in the morning.

When the father was ready to leave, the son said, “I won’t move from this place until you apprentice me to the sorcerer.” The father first reasoned with him, then wept, but the son was stubborn. “Apprentice me to the sorcerer,” he said.

So the father ran after the sorcerer’s coach and lay down in front of the horses. “Sir,” he said, “my son won’t move from his place unless he can become your apprentice.”

And the sorcerer drew up a contract agreeing to teach the boy sorcery for three years. “When the time is up,” said the sorcerer, “You can come and get him.”

Three years later the father arrived at the sorcerer’s house. The path to the door was guarded by wild animals, but he loved his son so much that he walked bravely past them. In the house he found his son sitting with the sorcerer and the sorcerer’s daughter.

The sorcerer recognized the father at once. “You’ve come for your son,” he said. “Well, you may have him only after you have passed a test. I will turn my daughter and your son into doves, and if you can tell me which of them is your son, you can have him. If you fail, he stays with me forever.”

The father was very angry and ran from the house, ran and ran until he came to a forest where he lay down and wept bitterly. Then he fell into exhausted sleep. He dreamed that somebody was poking him, and he awoke to see a gray old man standing by his side. “Why were you crying, my friend?” the old man asked.

The father told him all that had happened. “I sacrificed everything I owned for a child,” he concluded, “and now I’ll lose him forever if I fix on the wrong dove.”

The old man said, “Leave the forest and you’ll come to a field of rye. Pluck several stalks and take them with you to the sorcerer’s. Tell him that you’re ready for the test, and when he presents the doves to you, throw the kernels of rye in front of them. Watch carefully: The dove that gobbles up the rye is the sorcerer’s daughter. The bird who is your son will eat slowly because he is yearning to be with you.”

The father did as he had been told, and everything happened as the gray old man said.

After the father had chosen the dove who was his son, the sorcerer said, “Yes, you’ve picked out your son. But you can’t have him unless you sign a contract that he will perform no magic in my lifetime.”

The father agreed to the contract, and he and his son went on their way. Then the son said, “Father, you’re very poor. Let me turn myself into a horse so you can take me to market and sell me. You’re certain to get a good price. But when you’ve sold me, be sure to take my bridle off; otherwise I’ll be a horse forever. When you’ve taken off the bridle, I’ll turn into a dove and fly after you. And when I spot you, I’ll fly down and turn into a human again.”



So the son turned himself into a horse and his father led him to market. A great many dealers were interested in the horse. But the sorcerer was also there and saw what was going on. Disguising himself, he went up to the father and asked, “How much do you want for your horse?”

“A thousand rubles,” said the father.

“Let me try him out to see if he’s worth it,” said the sorcerer.

“Go ahead,” said the father.

The sorcerer jumped on the horse and said, “You’ll see your son about as soon as you can see your own ears. You signed a contract and you’ve broken it.” With that he lashed the horse and rode away.

When the sorcerer arrived home, he kept the animal in his stable. He beat it and watered it, but gave it no food. Then one day the rich man in Odessa sent for him again to perform tricks at another banquet for the poor. Before leaving, the sorcerer told his daughter to give the horse ten lashes and some water every day.

Yet the next morning when the daughter entered the stable, she was moved by the horse’s beauty. She caressed his head and removed his bridle. As soon as he was free of the bridle, the horse turned into a human and she recognized him at once. “Give me some water,” he said. And when she went to get the water, the boy turned himself into a dove and flew away.

The sorcerer on the way to Odessa saw the dove in flight above him. At once he understood what had happened and he turned himself into a hawk and flew in pursuit, upon which the dove turned himself into a ring and dropped into the sea. The hawk transformed itself into a duck with a copper bill and searched for the ring in the sea. The ring, meanwhile, moved toward the shore, little by little, until it washed up on a beach. There it was spotted by the king’s daughter, who had come to bathe. The duck, seeing her put the ring on her finger, flapped his wings and said to himself, “I’ll not be able to get him now, but just wait, I’ll use all my powers to get him back.”

Once she was at home, the king’s daughter felt the ring squeezing her finger. So she tugged and tugged at it until it fell to the ground, where it turned into a young man.

“Don’t be frightened,” he said to her. “I’m human, and I’m a sorcerer. But a more powerful sorcerer is coming who means to kill me. He’ll promise you mountains of gold for me, but it’s only a trick. When he tries to take me, I’ll turn into a ring again. Put the ring on your finger, and if he tries to grab it from you, throw it to the ground and it will turn into a pea. Then he’ll become a hen and try to eat me. But if you put your foot on the pea, it will turn into a polecat and wring the hen’s neck.”

And that’s what happened. And they threw the hen’s carcass into the street. The boy went back to the sorcerer’s daughter and married her, and they are alive and well to this day. Now the boy rides to Odessa instead of the sorcerer and performs tricks for the poor folk.

The boy’s father lives with them and is happy and has no need to go begging any more.