# ***The Beggar King and the Melamed***



In the city of Amsterdam there once lived a king and this king knew several languages, the Jewish sacred tongue, Hebrew, among them. Going to bathe in the river one day, he happened to pass through the Jewish ghetto. There was a small house where a traditional Jewish schoolteacher, a *melamed*, was teaching children the passage, “God topples the mighty to the ground and raises the lowly to the heavens.”

Getting out of his coach, the king went into the house and asked the *melamed* what those words meant. The meaning was, the *melamed* replied, that God can turn a king into a beggar and a beggar into a king. Hearing this, the king was very angry. “Prove it to me personally and I’ll reward you,” he said. “But if you can’t, I’ll have you beheaded.”

The *melamed* said he would indeed prove it, on condition that the king stay away from his house for at least five days. And the king promised.

As it happened, this *melamed* was one of the thirty-six holy men without whom the world could not exist, a *lamed-vov tsadek*, and he sat down and prayed.

Meanwhile the king went on his way to the river and, after turning his clothes over to a servant, jumped into the water. In a minute a demon out of hell assumed the king’s shape and emerged from the river. The demon called the servant to bring him his clothes, then dressed himself in the royal garments and rode home to the palace.

When the true king had had a good swim, he came out of the water and called his servant, but there was neither sound nor reply. The king shouted louder and louder and ran about trying to find his clothes and the carriage. Naked, he searched for hours until he was frozen. Finally he went home, still without clothing. The peasants in the street were amazed at the sight of a naked man shouting that he was the king. One even started to strike him with a whip, but an old peasant stopped him and then gave the king a ragged coat to cover himself.

The king went to his palace, but the soldiers guarding the gates drove him away, saying, “We don’t allow beggars to approach the king’s residence.” The peasants pitied the refined-looking beggar, but none of them believed him when he claimed to be king. Everyone knew that the king was exactly where he was supposed to be.

And that was how the king came to be a beggar. When he wanted to sleep, he had to go to the place where all the beggars spent the night. So after two days he left the city and went off to beg in the company of several other poor people like himself.

Little by little, the king got used to his new life traveling from town to town in the company of beggars. One day he was passing through the capital city again and found himself in the street that led to the river. From the house of the *melamed* came the teacher’s voice discussing the same passage, and interpreting it to mean that God could turn a king into a beggar and a beggar into a king.

The king went into the house and begged the *melamed*’s forgiveness for having doubted him. And he asked the *melamed* to help him become a king again. The teacher promised that he would. The first thing he did was to trim the king’s matted hair and beard. Then he bathed him and ordered a tailor to make him new clothes fit for a king. After that was done, he told him to go to church and wait outside at the time the king usually went to pray. When he saw the false king’s coach drive up and the imposter enter the church, then he, the real king, should call his coachman by name.

The king, now dressed like a king, did everything the *melamed* advised him to do. On Sunday he stood outside the church and waited till the imposter drove up. When the false king was inside the church, and after the first prayer was recited, the real king called the coachman, who drove up at once and helped him into the coach. So the king drove home and no one was any the wiser.

When the demon-King discovered the trick, he fled back to his place in hell. Then the real king commanded that the *melamed* be brought to him at the palace. He thanked him for his help and rewarded him royally.

And from then on, and to the end of his days, that king was a friend to the Jews.