# ***Of Mettles and Roses***



Once upon a time there was a rich man and his wife who had an only child, a very pretty daughter. When the girl was already well grown, the mother was taken ill and died. After a time the father began to worry because there was no woman to take care of his daughter, and so he decided to marry again.

At first his new wife loved her stepdaughter and tended her carefully. But when the stepmother gave birth to an ugly daughter of her own, she resented the beautiful child and began to think of ways to get rid of her.

Now, the rich man, a merchant, traveled frequently on business. Once when he was gone, the stepmother said to the lovely daughter, “Gather up the dirty clothes and wash them in the river outside of town.” Hearing this, the girl wept bitterly. No one ever went to that river because it was said to be under a curse. Nevertheless, she gathered up the clothes and obeyed her stepmother.

When she got to the river, tears rolled down her cheeks as she worked. Suddenly three water spirits rose out of the water. “Why are you crying?” the first water spirit asked.

“Because my stepmother has sent me here to get rid of me.”

“Don’t cry, princess,” said the water spirit. “Go back home. And from now on, the rarest roses in the world will spring up in your footsteps.”

The second water spirit said, “And when you wash yourself, the water in the basin will turn to gold.”

The third water spirit said, “When you speak, your breath will perfume the air and please everyone who hears you.”

Then the water spirits washed the clothes for her, and the pretty daughter went home. Sure enough, roses sprang up in her footsteps as she walked. When she got home she put the clothes away and went to wash herself. And sure enough, the water in the basin turned to gold.

Her stepmother, seeing this, asked her how it had happened. When the pretty stepdaughter described the water spirits, her breath perfumed the room.

“Aha,” thought the stepmother, “I’ll send my daughter on the same errand and the same things will happen to her.” But when the ugly daughter came to the river and the water spirits asked her what she wanted, she replied rudely. “You gave my sister gifts. Now give me some, too.”

“You want gifts, do you?” said the first water spirit. “Very well, then. When you walk, nettles will spring up in your footsteps.”

The second water spirit said, “And when you wash yourself, the basin will fill up with frogs.”

“And when you talk,” said the third water spirit, “your breath will have such a stink that no one will want to listen to you.”

And that’s how it was. As she went home, nettles grew in her footsteps. And when she washed herself, frogs appeared in the basin. And when she told her mother what had happened, the house filled with such a dreadful odor that her mother ordered her to stop talking.

Now it happened that in a nearby country there lived a king who had an only son. And this son was looking for a wife, but he had turned down every match that was proposed to him. Somehow he heard of the beautiful girl in whose footsteps roses grew. He discovered where she lived, and the moment he saw her he was enchanted. Not only was she beautiful and well bred, but when she spoke she breathed such a fragrance that talking with her was pure delight. What with one thing and another, they soon arrived at an understanding that she would come to his country and marry him in a month’s time. And at the end of the month, the beautiful girl stole away from her stepmother and her country in the dead of night and married the king’s son in his own land.

But through consultations with fortune-tellers, the wicked stepmother soon learned of this, and learned that the royal couple lived in great happiness. And later she heard that her stepdaughter had given birth to a child as lovely as she was. Of course, many years had gone by and it all took longer than it takes to tell.

Needless to say, the wicked stepmother was furious at the news. She sent for a sorceress and said, “Name your price. Just find a way to kill that stepdaughter of mine.”

“I’ll do it,” said the sorceress. And off she went to the palace of the stepdaughter. Using her magic, the sorceress found her way inside and to the bedroom where the princess lay sleeping beside her baby. The sorceress took out a long, sharp knife, cut the baby into four parts, and put the bloody instrument into the princess’s hand.

Later the prince, wondering why his wife was still sleeping, went into her bedroom and found the murdered baby and the sleeping princess holding the knife. The prince shouted, “What have you done? What have you done?”

The princess, awakened, looked around bewildered. Seeing the corpse of the baby, she cried, “No, no! I didn’t do it. I didn’t do it.”

But nobody would believe her, because, after all, who else could have done it? Besides, no more roses grew in her footsteps, no more water turned to gold when she washed, and her breath did not perfume the air when she spoke. The water spirits’ magic had been destroyed by the sorceress’s evil deed.

The king commanded that the princess’s eyes be put out. Then the mutilated body of her baby was placed in a sack and given to her, and she was driven from the palace.

Weeping bitterly, the blinded princess found her way into a forest. When she sensed that night was falling, she sat under a tree and sang softly to herself like one of the birds in the boughs above. Singing thus, she fell asleep. As she slept, her own mother appeared to her in a dream and said, “My child, you have suffered much and you are destined to suffer more. But soon you will gain some relief. In the morning you will find yourself sitting beside a well. Touch some of the well water to your eyes, then take more water and wash the body of your baby.”

In the morning the princess followed her mother’s instructions. And when she touched some of the well water to her eyes, her sight returned. And when she washed her baby’s body, it came alive again. Happy to be carrying her living baby, she made her way through cities and towns and villages, earning her keep by singing wherever she went.

Eventually the princess tired of wandering. For her growing child’s sake she settled in a large city, where she found work with a family of rich people.

Sometimes she sang as she worked, and always her song told the story of her life. Everyone who heard her was deeply moved.

Now it happened that her rich employer, who was a friend of the king, gave a banquet to which he invited the king and his son, the prince. The guests were entertained by singers with all kinds of songs. “These songs are very beautiful,” the young prince said, “but none tell of lives that are anything like mine. Ah, what I would give if I could hear a song that resembled in some way the story of my life.”

At this the hostess said, “There is a young woman working for me who often sings a song that resembles the story of your life.”

The prince begged his hostess to send for the young woman. The servant, finely dressed and very beautiful, came in and began to sing, and the prince was transfixed as he heard episode after episode of a song that touched on his own life. Then the singer came to the part that told how she had married the king’s son, how he had cast her away, and what had happened to her afterward.

Hearing it all, the prince wept and wept. Then, taking the singer by the hand, he said, “This is she. This is my true and blameless wife, whom I love dearly.”

And so they were united once more. And they lived happily ever after.