# ***The Demon and Sosye***



There was a man whose great sorrow was that Sosye, his wife, was a terrible shrew. Though he wanted to get rid of her, he didn’t know how. He talked it over with a good friend, who said, “Listen, there are demons in your well. Why don’t you throw Sosye in? Let them have her.”

And that’s what he did. But three days later it occurred to him that it would be only decent to pull his wife’s body out and give it a proper burial. So he tied an anchor to a rope and lowered it into the well. When he pulled the rope up, he found a demon clinging to the anchor. He would have thrown the demon back, but it cried, “No, please don’t! Three days ago a woman named Sosye fell in, and she’s down there driving all of us to distraction.”

When it saw that the man was listening, the demon said, “Don’t throw me back and I’ll make you rich. Here’s how. I’ll go haunt the houses of the nobility; then you can come and say that you know spells and incantations for exorcising demons. You’ll recite some words, I’ll disappear, and the nobles will pay you a fat fee. But remember, we can do this only three times. Any more and it won’t work.”

“Very well,” said the man, and he let the demon go.

The demon kept its word and haunted a count’s palace so effectively that the household was turned topsy-turvy. Then Sosye’s husband showed up and said to the count, “My lord, for a fee, I can recite certain spells and incantations that will drive away the demon who haunts your castle.”

“If you can do that,” said the count, “I’ll reward you well.”

With that, Sosye’s husband recited spells and incantations and the demon promptly left the castle. As he had promised, the grateful count gave him a rich reward.

Sosye’s husband and the demon played this trick on a second nobleman and then on a third. As a result Sosye’s husband acquired a considerable reputation as an exorcist and a lot of money besides.

Then one day he was called in to exorcise the demon for a fourth time. But the demon said, “Too bad for you. I warned you the trick would work three times only. Now I’m here to stay for good.”

Sosye’s husband stood sadly for a while, lost in thought, then he brightened and called in a loud voice, “Sosye, my wife, come back.” When the demon heard the name Sosye, it took to its heels and ran off.

And the exorcist was richly rewarded again.