# ***How Much Do You Love Me?***



Once upon a time there was a rabbi and his wife who had three daughters. The rabbi, wanting to know how much his daughters loved him, said to the oldest, “Rokhele dear, how much do you love me?” To which she replied, “As much as gold.” He went to his second daughter. “Khavele dear, how much do you love me?” “As much as silver,” she replied. Then he said, “Sorele dear, how much do you love me?” And she said, “Father, I love you as much as food that has been properly salted.”

When he heard, “as much as food that has been properly salted,” he drove her out of his home.

Sorele went weeping. Night overtook her and she had no place to go, but still she walked on. Then she met an old man, who was really Elijah the Prophet.

“Where are you going, my child?” he asked.

So she told him her story. “I see,” he said. “Here, take this little stick. Keep on this road until you come to a house where you hear someone making the blessing over wine. Then be sure to say ‘*Omeyn*,’ amen. But no matter who asks you into the house, don’t go unless it is the rabbi himself. Then, you may go in. When you are inside, go up to the attic and hide the stick there. Then whenever you need anything, take the stick out and say, ‘Stick, open!’ And whatever you want will appear before you.”

When he had done speaking, he disappeared. She went on until she saw the house and heard someone making the *kidesh* over the wine. Three times she responded “*Omeyn*.”

Hearing an *omeyn* from outside, the people in the house were startled. The rabbi’s wife went out and invited the girl in, but she refused. It was not until the rabbi came out and repeated the invitation that she entered.

Inside she crouched sadly beside the oven. The rabbi’s wife brought her food, but it did not cheer her. The next morning the rabbi, his wife, and his son dressed up and left the house to attend a wedding. The girl wanted to go too, so she went up to the attic and, taking out her stick, said, “Stick, open!” The stick opened, revealing a basin of water and a bar of golden soap. When the girl had washed, she said again, “Stick, open!” and it opened to present her with a costly set of clothing. The girl dressed in an exquisite gown and put on a pair of golden shoes. Looking absolutely beautiful, she went to the wedding.

There she dazzled the rabbi’s son, who did not recognize her as the beggar maiden living in his own house. But though he asked her several times to say who she was, she always turned the conversation to something else.

Finally he said to his mother, “That beautiful girl won’t tell me her name, but I have a plan to find out who she is.”

He fetched some pitch and used it to smear the doorsill of the house. When it came time for the wedding guests to leave, the beautiful maiden started hastily toward home. But when she crossed the threshhold, one of her shoes stuck in the pitch, and she had to go on wearing a single shoe. The rabbi’s son picked up the other one and put it in his pocket.



Meanwhile Sorele went up into the attic, changed into her old clothes, and came back down again.

The rabbi, his wife, and their son returned from the wedding. The son said, “See, I have the beautiful maiden’s shoe. I’m off into the wide world to find her.” He searched high and low for a maiden who could wear the golden shoe, but he couldn’t find one. At last he returned home in despair.

“Let me try the shoe,” Sorele said. “Perhaps it will fit me.”

“Come on,” he said. “As if a shoe like this could fit a beggar girl like you!”

She snatched it from him and slipped it onto her foot, where it settled as snugly as if it had been sewn for her.

Seeing this, the rabbi and his wife and son were very unhappy. How could he marry a beggar?

A few nights later they were sadder still, because each of them had been warned in a dream not to hinder their son’s wedding to the poor girl. The troubled parents went for a walk to consider what to do.

Left alone in the house with the rabbi’s son, Sorele said, “If you’ll come to the attic with me, I’ll show you who I really am.”

He followed her up the stairs, and the girl said, “Stick, open!” Suddenly all sorts of wonderful clothes appeared. “Some for you,” she said, “and some for me.”

Each of them put on the finery and went out for a stroll.

Later, the rabbi and his wife, out on their walk, met their splendidly dressed son walking with a beautiful girl as richly garbed as he. This frightened them because of the dream that had warned them not to hinder their son’s marriage to Sorele. And here he was walking about with some beautiful and wealthy girl whom they had never seen.

The two young people returned to the house and changed to their ordinary clothes. When the rabbi and his wife came home, the son said to his parents, “Stop worrying. I’m going to marry Sorele. Everything will be all right.”

“Well …,” said his parents, in some confusion. “If you are determined, then marry her you will.” And they sat down to address invitations to all the rabbis in the country.

As the wedding preparations went forward, the girl went to the kitchen and said to the cooks, “Whatever dishes you make, be sure to cook some without salt.”

Came the wedding day. Rabbis from cities throughout the land arrived. To the amazement of the groom’s parents, the bride, in her fine clothes, looked like a princess.

After the ceremony people sat about enjoying their food. One of the rabbis, however, did not find the menu to his liking. Seeing his unhappiness, the bride went up to him and said, “Dear guest, what’s the matter? Everyone but you is eating.”

“Ah,” he said, “no doubt the food is very good, but the dishes have no salt.”

“Father, dear Father,” she said, “do you remember that I said I loved you as much as food that has been properly salted? Yet you drove me away from home.”

Her father, hearing these words, dropped into a dead faint. When he came to, he told everyone that the bride was his daughter.

And there was carousing and merriment until dawn.

Elijah the Prophet gave the couple a diamond chandelier for a wedding present. And the moment they touched it, they ascended into heaven.