# ***The Master Thief***



Once upon a time there was a king who had three sons, two of whom were clever while one was a fool. The clever ones could not abide the fool and continually ridiculed him. To make matters worse, the fool drifted into bad behavior, such as stealing goods in the marketplace. When the king learned about this, he drove the fool out of the country.

The fool traveled on and on until he came to a forest, where he met a band of thieves. “I’m a thief, too,” he said, “so let me join you.”

“Very well,” they said, and took him into a cave where they gave him food and drink. “Now show us a thievish trick,” they said.

“Give me a new shoe; then come with me to the highway outside the forest,” said the fool.

On the highway they saw a peasant driving a horse and wagon. The young thief took one of the shoes, slipped it onto the road where the peasant would pass, and hid in the forest.

Seeing a shoe lying in the highway, the peasant thought, “One shoe! What good is a single shoe?” and went on. When he was gone, the fool ran out, grabbed the shoe, and ran through the forest for a mile or so. When he was ahead of the peasant again, he darted onto the road, dropped the shoe, and hid in the forest again.

The peasant, driving by, saw the shoe lying there and said to himself, “Ah, if there are two shoes they might turn out to be useful.” So he got down from the wagon and ran back to look for the other shoe. As soon as he was gone, the fool came out of the woods and drove the horse and wagon to the thieves’ cave.

Meanwhile the peasant came to the place where he had seen the first shoe. He spent several hours looking for it without success and then went back to his horse and wagon. When he came to the stretch of road where he had left them, he searched high and he searched low, but no luck.

The fool said to the thieves, “Watch me steal his clothes, too.”

“All right,” they said. “Let’s see you do it.”

He killed the horse, cut off its head, and propped the head up in the water of the river nearby.

The peasant, still running about searching for his horse and wagon, saw the horse’s head sticking out of the water and was overjoyed. “My nag must have drawn the wagon into the river.” With that he took his clothes off and dashed into the water to lead the horse out. In the meantime the young thief stole the peasant’s clothes and carried them to the other thieves.

When they saw what he had done, they said, “You’re much too clever for us; you could trick us out of everything. So why don’t you just go away? Here, take as much money as you like, but go away.”

The young thief took a large sum of money, and went from one country to another, learning more and more about his trade, until he became a master thief. One day he came to a kingdom whose king had an only daughter—the most beautiful young woman in the world. The king had decreed that whoever could guess her name within four months could marry her, but anyone who guessed wrong would be sent to prison and fed only bread and water for four years. The young thief discovered that his two clever brothers had tried and failed to guess the princess’s name and now lay in the king’s dungeons.

“Ah,” said the young thief, “I’ll marry the king’s daughter without having to guess her name.” So he dressed in fine clothing and went to the palace, where he announced that he was a prince who wanted to marry the princess.

Now the king gave a great banquet, at which the thief was an honored guest. Everyone ate and drank the best of everything and the king granted the thief the usual four months to guess his daughter’s name.

As the feast proceeded, the young thief stole the king’s wine cup. When the servants were clearing the table, they noticed that it was missing and they reported it at once to the king. He decided that everyone at the banquet would have to be searched. The guests lined up, and the thief got behind a priest who wore a hood that hung down behind his back. The thief slipped the cup into the hood, and of course no one searches a priest, so the holy man went out of the palace with no trouble. The thief followed him and retrieved the cup from his hood.

After everyone at the banquet had been searched and the cup had not been found, the king’s counselors decided that he should give another banquet a week later and strew gold coins on the floor. No doubt the thief would be among the guests, and when he tried to steal the coins he could be caught.

At the banquet the young thief saw the gold coins lying on the floor and noticed that no one bent to pick them up. Well, what do you think he did? He went out and took some axle grease from a wagon and put it on the soles of his shoes. Then he walked about over the coins and got them all because, of course, they stuck to his soles.

Well, since no one had seen anyone bending down, the king’s counselors proposed giving another banquet a week later. At that time the princess, wearing her diamond earrings, would be put to bed in the garden. If he was there, the thief would certainly try to steal the earrings from her. But the princess would be given a piece of indelible chalk with which to mark the thief when he made the attempt.

And so it was done. The banquet was held, and after dinner the guests walked about in the garden and saw that the princess was sleeping there. The young thief waited until he was alone. Then he went up to the princess and gently removed first one earring, then the other. But as he did, she marked his coat with the chalk. Seeing what she had done, he grabbed the chalk out of her hand and went about marking the clothes of all the men at the banquet.

When the king and his counselors looked about to see whose coat had been marked, they discovered marks on everyone’s, including the king’s. And the earrings were missing.

His counselors then advised the king to hold another banquet. And for that occasion a cabinet decorated with fine gems would be on display, and a paper floor would be built leading to the cabinet. The thief would undoubtedly try to make his way to the cabinet, and he would fall through the paper floor into the cellar.

Well, during the banquet everything happened just as planned. The young thief stepped on the paper floor and fell into the cellar. What do you suppose he did then? He grabbed up a drum and some drumsticks and created such a tumult that everyone came running. And of course, one by one, the whole crowd fell through the paper floor into the cellar. So again nobody knew who the thief was.

The king, seeing what had happened, said, “I confess myself beaten. Whoever the thief is, he’s cleverer than any of my counselors.” The king described all the thefts to his guests. “And it’s clear,” said the king, “that the thief has not stolen anything for the sake of the theft but rather as a demonstration of his cleverness. I therefore decree that if he will reveal himself to us, he can marry my daughter without having to guess her name.”

The young thief said, “How can one be sure you’re not just saying that?” So the king issued a decree in which he promised that whoever had stolen the objects could marry his daughter. At that the young thief handed the king his wine cup, the gold coins, and the princess’s earrings.

The king kissed him and said, “You are the man, and you will be my son-in-law.”

Some time later, after the thief had been betrothed to the king’s daughter, he and the king were talking. The king said, “You know, I really don’t know who you are. Why don’t you tell me about yourself?”

“Well,” said the thief, “I’m the son of King So-and-So.”

“Oh,” said the king, “in that case, your two brothers are sitting in my prison.” And the king promptly ordered that the two brothers be freed. Then he sent a messenger to the father of the prince inviting him to come to the wedding. The father came, though of course he thought it was one of his clever sons who was about to be married. Yet when he found out that it was his foolish son, he was very happy just the same.

After the wedding all the other imprisoned princes were freed too, and sent home.

The princess’s father gave the thief a considerable portion of his kingdom. From then on, the young man was known as the Clever King, and his brothers were subject to his rule. And they all lived happily ever after.