# ***The Orphan Boys***



This happened a long time ago in a small town, a *shtetl*, where two orphan boys lived. They were named Berele and Shmerele and they had no home, no relatives, no parents. They were entirely on their own and grew up in the streets.

Well, there are do-gooders in every town. The do-gooders in this one couldn’t stand to see two hungry children, abandoned by God and man and roaming about in their ragged clothes like blind lambs. And so the boys were put to work chopping wood, carrying water, and doing other such tasks, for which they were occasionally tossed food from the back door of a kitchen, like dogs. They slept in the *hegdesh*, the poorhouse, on bundles of shredded straw and covered themselves with ragged quilts.

The town sent them to *kheyder*, where the do-gooders decreed that they would sit apart from the other pupils. Even when the children played together, Berele and Shmerele were excluded from the games because they were orphans.

One day Berele and Shmerele decided that there was no future for them in the village, so off they went. As they traveled, people gave them a bit of bread here, a sip of milk there. A potato. A morsel of cheese. And somehow they managed to keep body and soul together.

“Best not to stay in one place,” thought the boys. “Better to keep going.”

One day Berele and Shmerele came to a forest and walked through it until they reached a fork in the trail. Standing there was an old man with radiant features, clearly possessed by the Divine Presence. “Good morning to you, children,” he said. “What brings you into this forest?”

As if they were talking to their own father or grandfather, the boys told him of their suffering in the village and the griefs they had endured. The old man listened, his face glowing like the sun.

He stood musing after they had finished. Then, taking out his snuffbox, he put a couple of pinches into his nostrils, sneezed three times in a row, and then, taking a slim twig out of his breast pocket, broke it in two. Giving one piece to Berele, he said, “Take care of it. And carry it with you as you follow the road to the right. Keep going until the path is barred by a high fence that no one can climb. You’ll find neither gate nor door that will let you in. Then take the twig out of your pocket, sit on it, and repeat three times:


*Little stick, little stick, small as a tail*,

*Do what I bid you now without fail*.


“Then the stick will rise into the air and carry you over the fence into a palace. You’ll find a princess inside … and you’ll find happiness there.”

When he finished talking to Berele, he pulled a head of garlic out of another pocket and gave it to Shmerele. He said, “Carry this with you, my son, as you follow the left-hand path. Stay on it until you come to the capital city. When you arrive, everyone will be in mourning, for the king’s only daughter is dangerously ill. Announce that you can heal her, but insist that they leave you alone with the patient. Then take out the garlic head and repeat three times:


*Garlic, garlic, I know well*,

*Like an apple is your smell*.

*One and two and three and four*,

*Make her healthy as before*.


“After that she will recover. And there, my child, you will find happiness. But remember,” the old man said, addressing them both, “when you find happiness, you must not let it go to your head. Remember what your proper place is in the world. You must lead honorable and decent lives.” Having said his say, the old man bade them both farewell and disappeared into the dense forest.

Berele and Shmerele looked around. They ate their last meal together, and embraced tearfully. Then Berele went off to the right and Shmerele to the left.

Berele traveled three days and three nights until he came to the high fence no one could climb. He pulled out the twig the old man had given him, sat on it, and said three times:


*“Little stick, little stick, small as a tail*,

*Do what I bid you now without fail.”*


The twig rose into the air and Berele found himself standing inside a palace. He came to a room that gleamed and sparkled with gold, silver, and crystal, but there was no one in it. Berele went to a second room, which also gleamed and glistened with costly objects. A third room and a fourth were the same, shimmering with treasures but unoccupied. Finally he came to the last room and, with fast-beating heart, opened the door.

Like the others, this room was glittering and ornate, but there was also a woman dressed in the finest clothing standing in the doorway. She ran to him, embraced him, and kissed him as if she were his own sister. And she was so lovely. She clung to him and squeezed his hand and praised him for being brave. Berele thought he was in a delicious dream in which it seemed to him that his mother came from the other world to see her orphaned son. She hugged him and pressed him close to her heart. Then he snapped out of that fantasy and saw that there was a woman clinging joyfully to him. So he asked her why the palace was surrounded by such a high fence, and how it happened that she was there alone, and why she was so happy to see him.

She said, “You should know that I am the only daughter of a king. My father wanted to learn whether there really is such a thing as destiny. So he built this palace, and put the fence around it so that no man born of woman might enter. He stocked the palace with the best of everything. Food is handed in every day through a narrow opening. And my father has decreed that the man who can find his way in here will marry me. And that, my darling, is why I’m so happy to see you. You are my liberator, my destined groom.”

The servant who brought her food that day saw that there were now two people inside and carried the news at once to the king, who came at once to the palace. He kissed his daughter and Berele, and the two were betrothed right on the spot. And when they were brought to the king’s court, a truly regal wedding was performed. And Berele and his bride stayed in the royal palace.

Now let us return to Shmerele. He also traveled three days and three nights, until he came to the capital city. The entire town was in mourning, for the king’s only daughter was dangerously ill. The finest doctors and professors of medicine had done all they could to save her, but without success. The princess lay unconscious and her death was expected at any moment.

Shmerele hurried to the king’s palace and announced that he would cure the princess. The professors laughed, but Shmerele insisted that he could succeed where they had failed. So they quarreled fiercely until the sounds of the quarrel reached the king. “What harm can it do?” the king asked. “If she dies, it will have made no difference; and perhaps he might save her.”

And so the king commanded that the young man be admitted to the princess’s bedside. Shmerele said, “Thank you, my lord king. I undertake to heal your daughter, but on the condition that everyone must leave the sickroom.” The king was a little irritated by this but since he was a father, after all, and wanted his daughter healed, he yielded.

When Shmerele was alone in the sickroom with the princess, he took out his head of garlic and held it under her nose. Then three times he said:


*“Garlic, garlic, I know well*,

*Like an apple is your smell*.

*One and two and three and four*,

*Make her healthy as before.”*


The princess opened her eyes, but she was still unable to move. So Shmerele held the garlic under her nose and repeated the spell once more. And he did this three times, until the princess had completely recovered.

On her cure the princess became so fond of Shmerele that she could not bear to let him out of her sight. And to show their gratitude, the king and queen betrothed him to her, and in a little while the marriage was celebrated in the royal court. And Shmerele and his bride lived on in the king’s court.

From then on Berele and Shmerele lived happily and contentedly, honorably and decently, as the old man had urged.