# ***Two Brothers Who Went to the Devil***



Once upon a time there were two brothers, one rich and the other poor. The poor brother came to the rich one and asked for help, but the rich brother said, “You can go to the devil.” So that’s where the poor brother went.

As he traveled, he came to a river. There he found a man who carried people across but who couldn’t get out of the water himself. “Where are you going?” the man in the water asked.

“To the devil,” replied the poor brother.

“When you get there,” said the man, “tell him how it is with me: I can carry everyone across the river, but I can’t get out myself. Ask him what I must do to be able to climb out.”

“Very well,” said the poor man. Then he traveled on until he came to a large house full of young unmarried women. They asked him where he was going.

“To the devil,” he replied.

“In that case,” they said, “ask him why it is that there are no husbands for us.”

“I will,” said the poor man and went on his way.

Then he came to a young tree on which there were no leaves. “Where are you going?” asked the tree.

“To the devil,” replied the poor man.

“Then do me a favor,” said the tree. “Ask him why it is that I can’t grow leaves.”

“I will,” said the poor man and went on his way.

He walked and walked until he came to a little house that was set upon chicken legs. An old woman sat on the doorstep spinning. “Hey, where are you going?” she said.

“I’m going to the devil,” he replied.

“Ha,” she cried, “you’ve come to the right place. He’ll be back soon, and then he’ll eat you up.”

“Oh please, please hide me,” begged the poor man.

“All right,” said the woman. “I’ll turn you into a needle and stick you into the window curtain.” And that’s what she did.

Around midnight came a noise, and the devil flew down the chimney.

He sniffed and sniffed and then he said,


*“I smell something, something good*.

*I know what it is, it’s human blood!”*


With that, he searched everywhere in the house. But he didn’t notice the needle in the window curtain.

The next morning the devil told the old woman about the adventures he had had the day before. “Not far from here,” he said, “there’s a leafless tree with a rich treasure buried under it. If the treasure were dug up, the tree would sprout leaves again.

“Another thing: I passed a house full of young women. If they swept the place and gave it a good cleaning, they would all find husbands.

“Oh yes, and I passed a man who carries people across a river but can’t get out of the water himself. If he were to dip one of the people he carries into the river, he would be able to leave the water at last.”

The poor man, just a needle stuck in the curtain, heard all this. In the morning, when the devil flew up the chimney again, the old woman returned him to his original shape. “Thank you for your help,” he said, and away he went.

He went first to the tree, where he dug up the box of treasure buried at its roots. No sooner was the treasure in his hands than the tree sprouted leaves on all its branches.

With the chest of treasure under his arm, the poor man went to the house where the young unmarried women lived. “If you’ll get me something to eat,” he said, “I’ll tell you what the devil advised you to do.”

So they fed him, and when he was done eating, he said, “The devil’s advice is for you to sweep the house clean. If you do that, you’ll all find husbands.” And it turned out to be true. They cleaned the house thoroughly and soon afterward they were all married.

The poor man, his treasure under his arm, went on until he came to the river. There he said to the man who carried people across: “The devil says that you should dip one of your passengers in the water. Then you’ll be able to climb out.”

The man in the river followed his advice. And when he dipped one of his passengers in the river, he was able to get out easily.

The poor man, carrying his treasure, went on home. There he built himself a new house and bought clothes for his wife and children. And from then on, he and his family were no longer poor.

But when his rich brother heard what had happened, he was very curious. He hurried over to his brother’s new house and asked, “How did all this come about?”

“Simple,” said the formerly poor man. “You told me to go to the devil and I went. When I got there, I followed his advice.”

Hearing this, the rich brother was consumed with envy and decided to follow in his brother’s footsteps. But in his case, when he came to the no longer leafless tree, the tree struck him with its branches. When he came to the house where the formerly unmarried women lived, they struck him with their kneading troughs. And when he got to the river, the man who formerly carried people across pushed him in. And from that day to this, the envious rich brother has had to carry people back and forth across the river.