# ***The Magic Fish and the Wishing Ring***



Once upon a time there was a childless king. Above everything he wanted to beget a child who would rule his kingdom when he was gone, but neither doctors nor magicians had been able to help him.

The king heard of a certain rare fish in such-and-such a river, and any woman who ate even a morsel of this fish would conceive a child. He sent at once for the royal fisherman and gave him four weeks to catch it. “If you bring me the fish, I will make you my viceroy,” the king said. “If you fail, I will have you beheaded.”

The royal fisherman went to the river eagerly, for he too was childless. And oh, what a catching of fish there was! At first he caught a big fish, then little ones. And each time he caught a fish, he examined it closely, but it was never the one he sought. At the end of two weeks he was catching no more fish, only worms and more worms.

Three and then four weeks were up and there was not even a worm left in the river. The fisherman was in despair when suddenly he heard a great splash. Turning, he saw a man standing in the water and holding a live fish. “Here is what you’re looking for,” said the man, who, of course, was Satan. “I’ll let you have it on the condition that when he is thirteen years old, you’ll give me the boy your wife will conceive after she has eaten some of this fish.”

Without hesitation, the fisherman pledged to give the boy over Then, carrying the fish, he hurried to the king.

There was a great banquet, where the fish was served, and at which the king appointed the fisherman as his viceroy. And all the women who ate the fish, and whose husbands came to them that night, did conceive children.

Nine months later the queen gave birth to a daughter while the viceroy’s wife gave birth to a son. The two children were raised together and startled everyone with their learning and talent. When they were not yet grown they became engaged, and it was generally agreed that after the king died, the two of them would rule the kingdom.

But the viceroy, the former fisherman, remembered what he had promised the man in the river and grew sadder with the years. One day when his son was twelve, the boy said, “Father, what is troubling you? Don’t spare me, I can endure it.”

So the viceroy revealed the truth about his pledge. “So be it, if it is my destiny,” the boy said calmly. “But get me a boat, Father, and leave the rest to me.”

When the day came that they were to separate, they went together to the riverbank and the son stepped into the boat his father had provided. Then the viceroy called out, “Satan, take what is yours and grant that I have fulfilled my pledge.”

With a great splash Satan appeared. He acknowledged that the pledge had been met and turned to snatch the boat, but the son was such a skilled helmsman that he eluded Satan. They began a chase near and far, downriver and into the ocean, the devil almost but never quite catching the boy. At last Satan, exhausted, spat after the boat and sent it scudding across the sea to the edge of the world.

The vessel was cast up on the shore of a river, where the viceroy’s son stepped out. For three days he wandered; on the fourth he came to a large city. He went into various houses, but they were all empty. He concluded, then, that there must be a council meeting in the king’s court, and he walked down the main avenue till he came to the royal palace. Here too nobody was to be seen. He looked about and his eyes fell upon a tablet inscribed with these words:


*Just as East*

*May not meet West*,

*Just so it is*

*Impossible that here*

*A human can appear*.

*And yet, should one*

*By some strange luck*

*Find his way here*,

*Then let him knock*

*Three times*

*With a hammer*

*On the anvil he’ll find*

*In the large third chamber*.


The viceroy’s son followed the instructions. After the third blow on the anvil, a crowd of people seemed to start up out of the ground. They all filed by and bowed to him, crying, “Greetings to our liberator!”

When the queen came by, she explained that the people had, in the course of a war, been bewitched by their enemy and condemned to live underground. But now that he had broken the spell, he would be crowned king of this land.

And a few days later, that’s what happened. He became king of the people he had freed, and in time he married their former queen and thus made her a queen again. He ruled happily for a long while, but then he began to think, “What have I got here? A king’s throne? I could have had that at home. I would have married the princess and become a king, and I would have brought happiness to my parents in the bargain.” And it struck him, too, that people at home must be mourning for him.

The queen noticed his unhappiness and said, “What’s making you so gloomy?”

He told her, and she said, “If you really want to see your family and friends, I can arrange it. Here,” she said, giving him a ring. “You have only to put this on and say, ‘Take me to the land of my birth,’ and it will take you there at once.

“But once there, you must tell no one about our country. If you do, dreadful things will happen to you.”

“I promise,” he said. And with that he put on the ring and gave the order, “Take me to the land of my birth.”

Away he flew, and in an instant he was at home. Everyone was so glad to see him that a holiday was declared, during which the viceroy’s son got so drunk that he forgot his promise to his queen. “In that other country,” he bragged, “my wife is so beautiful that if you were to see her, your eyes would be dazzled. And … and … not only my wife … my cook, if she were here, would be the most beautiful woman in the land.”

The king said, “Brag away. Talk is cheap. How do we know that you’re telling the truth?”

“You want proof?” said the viceroy’s son. “I’ll give you proof.” With that he put the ring on his finger and cried, “Bring me my wife and my cook.”

And there, standing in the doorway of the banquet hall, stood his wife and his cook from that other country, and their beauty did indeed dazzle the people. No one, including her husband, noticed the displeasure behind his queen’s smile.

A day or two later the viceroy’s son was strolling in the countryside with his wife and cook. At a grassy knoll they sat down to rest, and the two women poured a glass of wine for him. The young man, expecting no evil, drank and fell instantly into a deep sleep.

Then the queen and the cook took away his clothes, the magic ring, and all signs of his identity. Leaving him sleeping on the grass, they disappeared forever.

When he woke and saw what had happened, he was too ashamed to go back into town. A kindly peasant gave him some old clothes, and for a year or two he wandered from town to town.

One day as he was traveling through a forest, he came upon three foolish brothers quarreling over an inheritance that consisted of a saddle that could seat seven people, a whip that could lash out of its own accord, and a piece of cloth that could make anyone invisible. “Why don’t you let me help you?” the young man said. “Give me the saddle, the whip, and the cloth and I’ll divide them in a way that will please you all.”

“Very well,” the three fools said, and gave him their inheritance. He seated himself in the saddle and, seizing the whip, cried, “Hey, brothers, can you still see me?”

“Yes,” they replied.

“In that case,” he shouted, “Saddle, carry me home. Whip, strike. Cloth, cover me.” The whip struck at the brothers, the cloth made him invisible, and away he went until he was back in his home town. There he wrapped the saddle and the whip in the cloth and walked about.

Great crowds of people thronged the streets. The viceroy’s son stopped a passerby and asked, “What’s going on?”

“Where are you from? Why, the smallest child in town knows that the old king and queen are dead and we’re having a wedding and crowning a new king today. Our queen was to have married the viceroy’s son, but he disappeared.”

When the viceroy’s son heard this, he wrapped himself in the magic cloth and went at once to the coronation. The queen appeared leading her husband-to-be, who was about to be crowned when the invisible viceroy’s son cried to his whip, “Whip, give him fifty lashes.” Before everyone’s eyes the whip set about beating the would-be king. Then the viceroy’s son cried, “On, Whip. Give the queen fifty strokes!” And the whip turned on the queen, who wept and begged, “Whoever is beating me, please show yourself.”

The viceroy’s son threw off the magic cloak and the queen exclaimed, “It’s him—he is the true king,” and fell to the ground in a faint.

When she recovered, she and the viceroy’s son were married, and he was crowned king with great joy on all sides.