# ***The Hunchbacks and the Dancing Demons***



There were a couple of hunchbacked brothers who lived in the same village, but they did not get along. They were always mocking each other, quarreling, making each other’s lives miserable. But you could cheer either one up by telling him that the other’s hump was bigger.

One of the brothers was meaner and more spiteful than the other. At last the other, feeling that his bad-tempered brother was shortening his days, decided to leave the village. He gathered together such rags as he had—an old shirt, a pair of trousers, some scraps of cloth for his feet—and put them in a sack. With the sack over his humped shoulder and a stick in his hand, he started off one morning at dawn.

He traveled from village to village, from town to town, from city to city. He wandered through woods and over fields, till one day he was forced by bad weather to spend the night in an open field. He was lonely there all by himself, but what else could he do?

Then, in the distance, he saw the protruding tip of a roof. He walked toward it and found that it was an abandoned hut, so he went inside. It had a broken-down bed with a bit of littered straw for a mattress, and putting his sack down, he flung himself on it and went to sleep.

Toward midnight he was awakened by a loud noise. Opening his eyes, he saw a crowd of carousing demons making a great racket. As they beat a drum and danced about, they stuck out their tongues, squealed, whistled, and howled.

All at once they came upon the hunchback. They hauled him out of bed and made him join their circle. He danced about with a will, making the same strange cries, and this pleased them very much.

Everyone danced until it was almost one o’clock in the morning. Then the chief of the demons said, “You’re a great fellow; we’d like you to visit us again. And to make sure you come back, we want you to leave us a pledge.”

The hunchback offered them his shirt and trousers, but they said, “No, we don’t want them.” He offered his sack, but still they said, “No.”

“What can I give you?” he asked. “I haven’t got anything else except my hump.”

“That’s it!” cried the chief of the demons. “Your hump. Now, that’s undamaged goods. There’s a pledge we can accept.” Then all the demons formed a circle around the hunchback, though when he looked around a moment later, nobody was there. And not only were the demons gone, but when the hunchback touched his shoulder he found that his hump was gone too.

The former hunchback, his head held high and his shoulders thrown back, strode through the streets of his village. He was met by his mean-tempered brother, who looked him over and said, “Where have you left your hump?”

The other described all that had happened—the hut and the demons and the dancing. “And that,” he concluded, “is how I got rid of the hump.”

“Where’s the hut?” the mean hunchback asked eagerly.

His brother provided instructions on which paths and trails to take, and the hunchback started off. He walked on and on until at last he came to the hut. There he found the bed littered with straw, just as his brother had described it. He too went to sleep and, just at twelve o’clock, the demons arrived and began their dance. There were the same strange cries, the drumming and whistling, the tapping of feet, just as he had been told.

This time too the demons took the hunchback into their circle, and he danced along with them, matching their cries. They were delighted with him. A few minutes before one o’clock, when their carousing was ended, the chief of the demons said, “You’re an honorable fellow. You kept your word and came back to us, so now we want to return your pledge.”

With that he gave the other demons a signal, and they formed a circle around the mean hunchback. And when they found that he already had a hump on his back, they stuck the pledged hump on his chest, so now he had two.