# ***The Princess of the Third Pumpkin***



Once upon a time there were a king and queen who had an only son. When he was eighteen years old, they sent for him and said, “Dear son, it’s time for you to be married.” And the son replied, “If you find a bride for me, I’ll gladly marry.” The king ordered the most beautiful maidens of the country to be brought before the prince, but the young man was not pleased with any of them. So the king proclaimed that anyone who could procure a bride for his son would be richly rewarded.

An old woman came to the palace and said, “Lord king, I have a maiden for you who is unique in all the world.”

“Let’s see her,” said the king.

The old woman said, “Let the prince get up at dawn. Let him put on his coat and take his knife and a bottle of water, and let him go into the king’s garden. There he will see three pumpkins growing on a single vine. Let him take his knife and cut one off. The most beautiful princess in the world will emerge from it. Let him give her water to drink and she will at once be willing to be his bride.”

The king thanked her and commanded that she be given a place in the little hut in the courtyard that was near the royal kitchen. Then the king called his son and told him what he had to do to get a bride. The prince followed the king’s instructions: He got up at dawn and put on his coat. He took along his knife and a bottle of water and went into the royal garden. There he saw three pumpkins growing on a single vine. He took his knife and cut one off. A naked princess as lovely as a sunrise stepped out of the pumpkin and cried, “A drink, a drink, a drink!” But the princess escaped before the prince could give her water from his bottle. So he cut a second pumpkin from the vine, and again a beautiful naked princess stepped out. She cried, “Oh, a drink, a drink, a drink!” But before the prince could give her water, she escaped. So the prince cut the third pumpkin from the vine, and from it stepped a naked princess, uniquely beautiful in all the world, who cried, “Oh, a drink, a drink, a drink!” And the prince quickly put his bottle to her lips and she drank her fill and stayed.

The prince took his coat off and wrapped the princess in it, then set her on the branch of a tree and started off to tell the king that he had found a bride. Meanwhile the princess sat on the branch of the tree.

Now, the branch overhung a well, and a gypsy woman came to it for water. She looked into the water and cried out, “Oh, how lovely I am!”

The princess on the branch cried, “A curse on you! You? Lovely? It’s I who am lovely.”

The gypsy looked up and saw the princess sitting in the tree. So she dragged her out of it, took the coat, and threw her into the well, after which she donned the prince’s coat and perched herself in the tree.

And now the joyful king and queen came running and looked up at the bride. “Oh my, a gypsy,” they thought. But they pitied the prince and said nothing to him. They sent for clothes and had the gypsy dressed and taken to the palace. And the gypsy with her spells made the prince believe that she was the beautiful princess, and preparations began for the wedding.

One day the king’s cook went to the well to get a pail of water. As he pulled it up, he saw a golden fish swimming in the pail. He took it to the kitchen and cooked it, but he threw the scales outside. Now, the old woman who lived in the hut near the royal kitchen looked out and happened to see the scales. She gathered them up and sewed them together to make a little shoe. She hung it up on the wall of her hut before she went to bed that night.

When she woke in the morning, she was astonished to see that the hut had been tidied, her breakfast had been cooked, and her bread was already baked. She sat down to spin flax. She spun and spun until she fell asleep. When she woke, she discovered that all her flax had been spun.

She was curious to know who was helping her, so she decided to stay up all night and find out. She got into bed, closed her eyes, and pretended to be asleep. Late at night she opened her eyes and saw a princess lovely as the world come out of the golden shoe. The princess heated the oven, baked the bread, and tidied the hut.

The old woman got silently out of her bed and stole over to the wall. She snatched the golden shoe and flung it into the fire. The princess, seeing this, set up a clamor. But it was too late. The little golden shoe had burned up, and the princess had to stay with the old woman.

One day the princess said, “I’m very bored. Give me some work to do.” So the old woman went to the king and said, “I’m very bored. Give me some work to do.” So the king gave her some thread and told her to crochet a tablecloth out of it. The old woman took the thread back to her hut and gave it to the princess, who sat down and crocheted a tablecloth in the design of a garden. And in the middle of the garden she crocheted a portrait of her own face.

The old woman took the tablecloth to the king, who liked it so much that he had it placed on the table at a banquet for the prince and his wife. As the company sat eating and drinking and having a pleasant time, the prince looked at the tablecloth and saw the picture of the garden and the princess’s portrait. “Who crocheted that tablecloth?” he asked. The king said, “The old woman who lives in the hut near the kitchen.” The prince commanded that she be brought at once. The old woman came and the prince said, “Was it you who crocheted this tablecloth?” “No,” she replied. “Not I, but the princess of the golden shoe.”

The prince ordered her to bring the princess, so the old woman went home and came back leading her. The prince instantly recognized his betrothed, uniquely beautiful in all the world. He fell on her neck and wept as he embraced and kissed her. The gypsy bride, the false princess, was driven out of the palace, and the prince and princess were married and continue to live happily unto this day.