# ***The Orphan Boy Who Won the Bride***



Once upon a time there was a man who lived in a nobleman’s domain. The man and his wife had been childless for many years so he went to a rabbi in a nearby town and said, “Rabbi, my wife and I want a son. Won’t you pray for us and ask the Lord to bless us?” The rabbi said, “Yes, I will.” So he prayed to the Lord and his prayers were answered: The man’s wife became pregnant and bore a son. Of course, the overjoyed parents invited the rabbi to the circumcision feast.

When the boy was five years old, his parents died and there was no one to care for him. So the nobleman took the child into his own home and raised him himself.

The boy, eager to make himself useful, learned how to build things. Using a saw and a plane and a hatchet, he made sleds and wagons. Several years went by in this way and by the time he was twelve years old he had quite forgotten how to speak Yiddish. One night the boy’s father appeared to the rabbi in a dream and said, “Rabbi, my son no longer knows what he is. Take him away from the nobleman and instruct him in Judaism.” The very next day the rabbi went to the nobleman and pleaded for the boy to be given to him, but the nobleman refused.

Well, one way or another, the rabbi got the boy away from the nobleman and undertook to raise and instruct him. He taught him the rites of Judaism: when to wash his hands, how to make the blessing over bread, and so on.

When the boy was seventeen, a letter came inviting the rabbi to a wedding in a distant land. The youth said, “Rabbi, take me with you. I want to go, too.”

But the rabbi said, “How can I take you? You don’t have the right clothes. You can’t go traveling, ragged as you are.”

“Never mind that,” replied the youth, “they’ll find out who I am soon enough.”

The rabbi said, “You can’t come. I haven’t got enough money for both of us.” Then off he went on a ship, leaving the youth behind.

Or so he thought. But just before the ship weighed anchor, the boy, ragged as he was, slipped aboard and the ship sailed away. They were in mid-ocean before they knew it, and a great storm came up and blew the ship far out of its course until it came to rest, becalmed in the Congealed Sea.

Days went by and they stayed in the Congealed Sea, where there was nothing but derelict ships to be seen, and nothing to eat. Then one day a great storm blew up and broke the ship free and drove it across the ocean until it came to an island where they dropped anchor.

The hungry passengers decided to explore the island hoping to find berries and fruit to eat. The youth came upon an apple tree, which he climbed. He ate some apples and threw some down for the others who ate the fruit and then fell asleep beneath the tree. Meanwhile the youth, too, dozed up in the branches where, a little while later, he was awakened by the stirring of a breeze.

Startled, he looked around, then he called excitedly, “Rabbi, rabbi, you should see the stones that are up here.”

The rabbi called back, “What do you see on the stones?”

“I hardly know,” the youth called down, “it looks like very beautiful writing.”

“Copy down what you see on a piece of paper and throw it down to me,” said the rabbi.

The youth did what he was bidden. He copied down what he saw on a piece of paper and threw it down to the rabbi, but just then the rabbi and the other passengers went aboard the ship and sailed off, leaving the youth behind in the tree.

Well, he made himself as comfortable as he could and settled down to wait. That night a rabbi appeared beside him in the tree and taught him all of the Torah—and all the commentaries as well—so that he became a great scholar.

At daybreak, he spotted a ship passing by. He stood up in the tree and waved his hands and shouted, “Help, help, help!” Fortunately, the people on the ship saw him and sent a boat that took him off the island and brought him back to the ship which, as it happened, was also going to the town where the wedding was to take place.

When he arrived there, the youth took up lodgings in a poor man’s hut. He passed himself off as a merchant looking for goods to buy, and the poor man who owned the hut said to him, “I’ve been invited to a wedding. Why don’t you come with me?”

“How can I go to a wedding?” said the youth. “Look how ragged I am.”

“Never mind,” said his landlord, “I’ll find you some clothes.”

The landlord kept his word. He found the youth some clothes and they went to the wedding together.

At the reception before the wedding, even the rabbi who had raised the youth was unable to recognize him in his new clothes. The youth stood near a circle of rabbis and learned folk who were discussing and arguing various deep points of Torah commentary. At one point the prospective bridegroom gave a learned address to the assembled guests. The youth stood by silently, an enigmatic smile on his face.

The discussion, the disputation, the arguments went on and the youth, all the while, stood by with an enigmatic smile on his face. Finally, one of the rabbis was affronted and said angrily, “You, young man. You, with the grin on your face. If you have something to say, say it.”

The youth then put such subtle, such profound questions to the company that no one was able to answer them. Everyone was so delighted with his performance that the mother of the bride-to-be said to the father, “Now that’s the sort of husband our daughter should have.”

“You’re right,” her husband replied. With that they canceled the betrothal on the spot and engaged their daughter to the learned stranger.

When the time came for the wedding, the youth insisted that it be celebrated in the poor man’s hut where he was staying.

“How can that be?” he was asked. “It’s such a tiny place.”

“Never mind,” he said. “Everyone will fit.”

The preparations were made. The hut was decorated as well as it could be. When the musicians arrived, the youth said, “Don’t play yet. We won’t have music until twelve o’clock.”

Meanwhile more and more people came, and lo and behold, no matter how many entered the hut, there was always room for more. The entire population of the town came in, and the hut simply grew larger and larger.

Then all at once the sky turned dark and a gale blew up. The wedding guests ran outside and saw an enormous cloud descending from the heavens. When it reached the ground, the youth’s father and mother stepped down from the cloud, and they were followed by King David and all his musicians.

“Now play!” cried the youth to his musicians.

And they did, and the food was served, and the dancing began, and I too was there and had a good little glass of brandy.


*From my beard it dripped*,

*But none I sipped*.


As for the island—it was *ganeydn*, the Garden of Eden.