# ***The Merchant’s Son and the Demons***



Once upon a time there was a rich old man who had an only son. When the old man felt that he was dying, he sent for his son. “Dear child, I am leaving you well provided for,” he said, “but before I die, promise me that after I’m gone you will never travel anywhere by sea.”

“I promise,” the son said, and with that the old man died.

Well, time passed and the son lived on his father’s wealth, until one day a letter came to him from a merchant far across the sea. “Dear Sir,” the letter said, “Here in my country there is a fortune waiting for you, money that was owed to your father. It would be a pity for so much money to go to waste. Why don’t you come and get it?”

Without a moment’s thought the merchant’s son left his wife and child, hurriedly boarded a ship for that land beyond the sea. He had not traveled far when a storm blew up. The winds howled, the waves tossed, and all at once there was a terrible shudder and the ship began to sink.

It was then that the merchant’s son remembered the promise he had made to his father and began to repent from the bottom of his heart. Then suddenly he was assailed by a terrible dizziness and fainted dead away. As he lay there in a trance, his father appeared before him and said, “Well, my son, is this how you keep your promises?”

“Father, father,” begged the son, “forgive me. Oh, forgive me. Take pity on me—if not for my sake, then for my wife and my only son.”

The winds howled, the waves tossed, and the youth prayed. At last his father said more kindly, “Very well, listen to me. When you come to, you will find yourself clinging to a log. Just hold on, and it will keep you afloat until it drifts ashore. There you will find an eagle waiting for you. You must let the eagle take you where it will.” Having said that, his father disappeared.

And lo and behold, that’s what happened. When the young man came to, the ship was nowhere to be seen and he found himself in the water clinging to a drifting log. It was sunset. Soon it would be dark. Just then the rich man’s son heard the cries of beasts nearby and realized that he was near shore. So he turned the log loose and swam toward the land.

He dragged himself ashore, and suddenly there was a whoosh and a whirl and a spiral motion before his eyes. Before he knew what was happening, he was high in the sky, caught in an eagle’s beak and being carried higher and higher. When he looked down, he saw tiny trees in one place, in another, small streams. If he should chance to fall from such a height, there would not be an unbroken bone left in his body. “Oh Lord,” he cried, raising his eyes to heaven, “please don’t let me fall.”

With that he felt the beat of the great eagle’s wings gradually slowing, and felt how they were descending lower and lower until the eagle landed. On the ground the creature opened its beak and flew away.

“Where in the world am I?” said the rich man’s son as he looked around. At that moment he heard the voices of children in a *kheyder*, reciting their lessons. He followed the sounds until he came to a little house. He went in and saw a *melamed* sitting around a table with his pupils. He approached the teacher, put his hand out, and greeted him politely. To his dismay he was told by the teacher that he was in the land of the demons.

The rich man’s son wept bitterly. Pitying him, the teacher said, “Stay here with me. I’ll hide you from them.”

And so he did. But one day the rich man’s son had an impulse to go out for a walk. He had hardly taken two steps when a couple of demons seized him and took him to the court of Ashmodai, King of the Demons.

“And who may you be?” said Ashmodai sternly.

“A poor man who has been driven by misfortune into your country.”

“A mortal, eh? A mortal!” roared Ashmodai, his eyes glowing so fiercely that the merchant’s son was certain he was about to be swallowed whole. “Your kind and my kind are not the best of friends. The question is, shall I kill you now or later?”

The rich man’s son stood trembling while Ashmodai continued to mutter to himself. Finally the King of the Demons said, “Hmmm. Hmmm. Well … you seem a likely sort. In your case I think I’ll make an exception.” He added: “I’m going to need someone to take charge here when I go off to fight my new war.”

And so, as the weeks passed and Ashmodai prepared to go off to war, the rich man’s son settled down in the demon’s kingdom. With each passing day Ashmodai grew fonder and fonder of the mortal and trusted him more and more.

One day Ashmodai sent for the rich man’s son. “Well, sir, I’m off to war. Here, take these,” he said, handing over a great bunch of iron keys. “You can go anywhere you like except into the last room over there—the one that is opened by this key,” he said, clinking the smallest key in the bunch. “That room is forbidden,” he said grimly.

The demon turned on his heel and marched his army off to war.



Left alone, the rich man’s son wandered from room to room admiring the wealth and luxury he found everywhere. Finally he came to the room into which he had been forbidden to go. He paused, terribly tempted to open the door with the little key, whose clink he seemed to be hearing once again.

But it was not the sound of the key he heard. Oh, no. It was a sound much more beautiful. A sound so enchanting that he pressed himself against the door to hear it better. It was a woman singing. For a while he listened; then, overcome by the melody, he unlocked the door and went in.

The woman turned, and he saw that she was as dazzlingly beautiful as her song. And she, the moment that she saw him, flung her arms around him and kissed him.

Then, all at once, there was a dreadful racket. Suddenly Ashmodai stood in front of them, red and wrathful, his eyes flashing, his sword drawn, ready to kill. “You,” he raged, “you! Were you not warned to stay out? Were you not told this room was forbidden?”

The young woman who, of course, was Ashmodai’s daughter, seized her father’s arm. “No, Father,” she cried. “Don’t kill him, for he will be my husband.”

At these words Ashmodai calmed down and sheathed his sword. The very next day the demon’s daughter and the merchant’s son were married, and within a year she gave birth to a son, whom they called Shloyme.

One day as the couple were playing with their child, the rich man’s son heaved a deep sigh.

“Why are you sighing?” asked Ashmodai’s daughter.

“I’m sighing for the wife and son I left in the country I came from,” he answered.

“Poor man,” said Ashmodai’s daughter. “Would you like to pay them a visit?”

“Oh yes,” he replied.

“Well,” she said, “why don’t you go? But you must promise not to stay longer than three months.”

“All right,” he said. “But how will I get there?”

“No problem,” said Ashmodai’s daughter. And with that she sent for an old demoness to take her husband back to his home. The old demoness seized the merchant’s son and flew with him through the air so swiftly that he was back in his own country within hours. And there she left him.

His wife and child were delighted to see him, and he was so overjoyed to be there that he completely forgot his promise to return after three months. When the time was up, demons appeared in his dreams. They bore letters from Ashmodai’s daughter, letters which he ignored. “You disregard your promise at your peril,” the letters warned, but he continued to stay where he was.

Finally his son Shloyme appeared to him in a dream, saying, “Father: Mother and a pack of devils are at the town gate. If you don’t come home, she will destroy the town.” Frightened awake, the rich man’s son hurried off to the rabbi and told him the whole story. The rabbi convened a rabbinical court to deliberate over the matter. After several hours the court decreed that it was forbidden for a mortal and a demoness to marry. “And so,” said the rabbi, “Ashmodai’s daughter must give you a divorce.”

When Ashmodai’s daughter heard this news, she appeared before the rabbinical court and said, “Very well. What must be, must be. I will give him the divorce. But I want one thing before we part: I want to give him one last kiss.”

The rabbinical court granted her request, and the rich man’s son, poor fellow, suspecting nothing, stepped up to her and offered his face to be kissed. But Ashmodai’s daughter put her hands to his throat, and when he lay dead at her feet, she cried, “If I can’t have him, she can’t have him!” And with that she disappeared.