# ***The Golden Feather***



Once upon a time there was a well-to-do householder who had twelve sons, eleven of whom were clever while one was a fool. The same man owned a mare that had twelve colts, eleven of which were handsome while one was ugly.

The father lined up the twelve horses before his sons, and the eleven clever sons chose the eleven handsome horses. The ugly horse was left for the fool, and at this the fool began to cry.

But the ugly horse said to him, “If you’ll stop crying and do everything I ask, I’ll tell you how to turn me into a handsome horse.”

“All right,” said the fool, “I’ll do everything you ask.”

“First wash me and comb me,” the horse said. “Then I’ll be handsomer than any of the other horses.”

So the fool washed and combed him, and the horse turned very handsome. “Now,” said the horse, “harness me up and we’ll take a drive.”

The fool harnessed him up and they drove off. As they went along they saw something glistening in the roadway. The fool said, “Stop. I want to know what that is.” The horse stopped and the fool saw that the bright thing was a golden feather from some sort of golden bird.

The fool wanted to pick the feather up, but the horse said, “Don’t do it. I didn’t tell you to pick it up. If you do, you’re only asking for trouble.”

The fool said, “I’m not listening to you. I want the golden feather.”



“But,” said the horse, “you promised you’d obey me, and I tell you that if you take it, you’ll have more troubles than you ever dreamed.”

But the fool wouldn’t listen. He picked the feather up, and they went on their way into a dense forest, where they became lost. And the darker it grew, the brighter the feather glowed. The fool was delighted.

“Go on,” said the horse, “be happy. Your troubles will come soon enough.” But the fool ignored him.

They went deeper into the woods, until all at once they saw a hut. The fool said, “Stop here, horse. Let’s go to the hut and spend the night there.”

“No,” said the horse, “don’t do that.”

But the fool ignored him and went into the hut, where he found three young peasant women sitting. “Can we spend the night?” he asked.

“We can’t say,” they replied. “Our mother is a witch whose name is Bobe Ha. She’ll be home soon and you can ask her yourself.”

The fool showed them the golden feather, which lighted up the entire hut. The peasant women shivered with pleasure and said, “It’s a truly beautiful feather, but we can’t give you permission to spend the night. You’ll have to wait until Bobe Ha comes back.”

Just then Bobe Ha showed up with a great noise—rat-a-tat-tat, rat-a-tat-tat—for one of her feet was made of iron.

The young women said, “They want to spend the night.” Then they showed Bobe Ha the golden feather, and she said to the fool and his horse, “Yes, you may spend the night. But you’ll have to sleep on the floor with your heads at the threshold.”

The fool said, “That’s all right, we’ll sleep on the floor with our heads at the threshold.” Then Bobe Ha ran off once again to the woods.

The household settled down to go to sleep. The three young peasant women lay in their usual places, while the fool and his horse lay down on the floor with their heads at the threshold.

A little while later the horse said, “Ah, we’re in trouble. I warned you not to pick up the golden feather. I said it would get us into trouble. Bobe Ha would never have let us pass the night if we hadn’t had the feather.”

“Well, what can we do now?” asked the fool.

“I’ll tell you what to do,” said the horse. “Carry her three daughters over to our side of the hut. Put them down in our places, with their heads at the threshold, and we’ll lie in their places.”

The fool did as he was told. He put the three sleeping daughters on the floor with their heads at the threshold, and he and his horse lay down in their places.

Suddenly, in the middle of the night, Bobe Ha came hurrying back from the forest. She dashed up to the threshold and gave such a terrible stamp with her iron foot that the shattered heads of her daughters flew off in all directions. Then she ran back into the forest.

The horse said to the fool, “Quickly, harness me up. Take the golden feather and let’s get away. Drive me as hard as you can.”

The fool harnessed the horse as quickly as he could. Then he grabbed up the feather and off they went.

The next morning, miserable indeed was Bobe Ha when she came back to her hut from the forest and saw what she had done with her iron foot. “Woe is me,” she wailed. “I hacked my own daughters’ heads off. And those two have escaped with the golden feather. Oh, woe. Oh, woe.” And she started off in pursuit of them. She chased them and they ran for dear life, and as they ran they heard the rat-a-tat-tat of her iron foot.

“She’s chasing us, she’s chasing us!” cried the fool.

“Yes, I hear her,” said the horse. “Didn’t I tell you that troubles would follow if you picked up the feather? But you wouldn’t listen. Well, don’t panic, I’ve got an idea. Fill a pitcher with water and throw it over your head, and it will turn into a river that she won’t be able to cross.”

The fool did what he was told. He filled a pitcher with water and threw it over his head, and it turned into a broad river. When Bobe Ha came to the river, she couldn’t cross it. So she ran back home, snatched up a pot and ladle, and used them to quickly empty the river. Then she raced on in pursuit of the fool and his horse.

She ran after them and ran, and they fled with all their might, and as they ran they heard again the rat-a-tat-tat of her iron foot. “She’s chasing us, she’s chasing us!” cried the fool to the horse.

“Yes, I hear her. Didn’t I tell you that troubles would follow if you picked up the feather? But you wouldn’t listen. Well, don’t panic, I’ve got an idea. Pluck a handful of twigs and throw them over your head, and they’ll turn into a forest so dense she won’t be able to push through.”

So that’s what he did. He plucked a handful of twigs and threw them over his head, and they turned into a dense forest that she couldn’t push through. Back she went to her home, where she grabbed a hatchet and used it to chop a path through the forest. Then she raced on in pursuit of them.

She chased them and they fled with all their might, and as they ran they heard again the rat-a-tat-tat of her iron foot. “Help,” the fool begged the horse. “Help! What shall we do? We’re doomed.”

The horse said, “Hush. Don’t panic, I have an idea. Take a heap of sand and throw it over your head, and it will turn into a high mountain that she won’t be able to climb.”



So that’s what the fool did. He took a heap of sand and threw it over his head, and it turned into a high mountain. When Bobe Ha came to it, she couldn’t climb over. Back she ran to her house, grabbed a spade, and used it to shovel the mountain away. Then she raced on after them.

Again they heard the rat-a-tat-tat of her iron foot. The fool cried to the horse, “Do you hear? Oh, woe is me. Oh, woe!”

“Hush. Don’t panic,” said the horse, “I have an idea. Chop some wood into kindling, start a fire, and let the wood burn down to coals. Then take the coals and pour them into a hole outside the forest and put a thin wire across the hole. When Bobe Ha comes out of the forest and sees the coals, she’ll try to walk over the wire to get to the other side, but the wire will bend and she’ll fall onto the coals and burn to death.”

So that’s what the fool did. He chopped some wood into kindling and built a fire that he allowed to burn down to hot coals. Then he poured the coals into a hole near the forest and set a wire across the hole. When Bobe Ha came out of the forest and saw the hot coals in the hole, she tried to cross over the wire. But it bent, and she fell on the burning coals and burned to death.

Well, now that they were rid of Bobe Ha, the fool and the horse turned around and went back home. When they got there, and when the fool’s brothers saw how handsome his horse was and how brightly the golden feather shone, they liked him even less than before. But the horse, seeing the look of envy in their eyes, said to the fool, “You’ll have to leave home. Harness me up and let’s run off as fast as we can, because your life is in danger here.”

So the fool harnessed the horse, and they ran away until they came to a large village surrounded by fields. The fool plowed and sowed the fields and became very rich. He sowed rye and ground it to flour, and the horse carried loaves of bread to the city, where the fool distributed them to the poor, and everyone was very happy.

And he had the dear horse to thank for all that. Oh, was that a horse. What a horse that was! A horse in a million!

.   .   .




 


Storytelling was not only a pleasure for the father, but a must.… Teach through entertaining. Train children through story telling. “Thou must narrate” was a commandment of God.

—From a turn-of-the-century Jewish folklore  
                               journal


*W*e turn now to a body of religious tales with ethical messages. Like wonder tales, they are told as fiction and often begin, “Once upon a time.”

Some of these tales, called *mayses mit a muser-haskl*, “stories with a moral,” serve as guides to proper conduct, making explicit statements about acceptable and unacceptable behavior. While most wonder tales describe the adventures of young men and women and end with their marriage, most *mayses mit a muser-haskl* focus on married people with families and deal with aspects of moral life: generosity, piety, humility, hospitality, and kindness on the one hand, and stinginess, cruelty, meanspiritedness, immorality, arrogance, and pride on the other. In these tales, just as in the magical tales, the characters are generally all good or all bad, virtuous or wicked, humble or haughty, generous or selfish. The tales teach the Golden Rule and demonstrate that the virtuous will be rewarded and the wicked punished.

Beyond general ethics, they teach the specific commandments on which Jewish piety is built. The 613 *mitsves*, commandments, that appear in the Bible, as well as the laws formulated through later rabbinic interpretation, make up the structure of belief in the Jewish community. A number of the tales illustrate such commandments: “honor the Sabbath” (Exodus 20:8, 23:12(; “provide for the poor” (Deuteronomy 15:8(; “keep your vows” (Deuteronomy 23:23(; and “honor the aged” (Leviticus 19:32(.

The benevolent visitation of the prophet Elijah, who wanders the earth in various guises, brings help to the pious and the needy. When the helper is not Elijah, he is often a *lamedvovnik*, one of the thirty-six holy men in each generation for whose sake God allows the world to continue to exist. The *lamedvovnik*, a hidden saint, is usually a simple man like a water carrier or a poor teacher.

The tellers of pious tales generally make sure to drive home their ethical point. Some end their tales with an aside to the listener: “Now, it was *hakodesh borekh hu*, the Holy One, blessed be He, who did this for the pious man because he had not violated the Sabbath.” Or, “Let those who have wealth refrain from taking things for granted, since the Almighty may retrieve it at any moment and give it to someone else, even as He gave the treasure to this poor family.” It seems clear from endings like these that some of the tales were originally part of a sermon.

Of course, these sometimes ponderous “codas” were not appreciated by everyone. Sholem Aleichem wrote in his memoirs: “The children would have listened to all of \[grandfather’s tales\] with delight if he had not had the unpleasant habit of squeezing a moral, a *muser haskl*, out of each tale: ‘one had to be a pious Jew and have faith in God …’ The moral would be followed by a lecture and then he would start upbraiding us … for wanting only to fish night and day … and get into mischief.”1 The coda can also take the form of a popular proverb, such as *ver es grobt a grub far yenem, falt in im aleyn arayn*, “he who digs a pit for another, falls into it himself”—or it may be a quote of a Biblical or Talmudic passage. The moral can even appear at the beginning of the story, making it an “explanatory” tale that illustrates the truth of the statement.

In terms of atmosphere the pious tales are among the most “Jewish” of the stories in this collection. Time is marked by the observance of the Sabbath and the yearly cycle of holidays—Succos and Passover, Purim and Yom Kippur. Religious rituals and customs are carefully observed: the men don *talis* and *tfiln* (prayer shawl and phylacteries( at prayers; the women bathe monthly in the *mikve* in accordance with the laws of sexual purity. The settings in most cases are the small villages and towns of Eastern Europe, peopled by the traditional small-town types: the *melamed* ( *kheyder* -teacher(, the *parnes* (community leader(, the *arendarke* (innkeeper’s wife(, the water-carrier, the merchant, the *yeshuvnik* (Jewish villager(, the *porets* (the Polish squire(, and the rebbe (the Hasidic spiritual leader(.

Of course, no religious community would be complete without its *apikorsim*, its skeptics and heretics, and from them come some sharply satiric and antipious tales, like “Holding On to One-Quarter of My World,” and “Water Wouldn’t Hurt,” in which the wonder-working rebbe describes a ritual for saving a man’s burning house, but adds urgently that water won’t hurt, either.

If the pious tales served to regulate religious life from within, they also offer powerful testimony to the threat from without. A second group of tales in this section reflects the persecution to which Jews were subjected. The most insidious charge was the blood libel, by which Jews were accused of killing Christian children to get their blood for ritual purposes. From the twelfth century on, these charges were periodically leveled against Jews. Up to modern times they directly inspired anti-Semitic riots that devastated many communities. The most famous of the modern blood-libel trials was the Mendel Beilis case, which affected Jews throughout Eastern Europe from 1911 to 1917. Despite the fact that the twelve peasants on the jury declared Beilis not guilty, up to the eve of the 1917 revolution the Russian government was still trying to prove its case against Beilis and the Jewish people.

In the tales of persecution that appear in this section, the villains include viceroys, courtiers, kings, and local priests. The helpers of the Jewish community include a *lamedvovnik*, a rabbi, and a good emperor—and always the anti-Semites receive their just desserts. One such story is “A Shocking Tale of a Viceroy,” told as a pseudo-historical account set “in Amsterdam, a long, long time ago.” Actually, although Jews in neighboring countries suffered from blood libels, there were apparently never any in Amsterdam. But there is a Yiddish proverb: *af a mayse fregt men nisht keyn kashes*, “Don’t ask questions about a story.” The “Shocking Tale of a Viceroy,” unhistoric though it is, no doubt served to comfort people in their real dealings with a hostile environment in Eastern Europe. And indeed there were lessons reiterated in the persecution tales: don’t despair, justice will prevail, innocence will be proved, and the libelers will be punished. Through these tales and through the didactic “stories with a moral,” the community and its traditions were strengthened.