# ***The Tale of a Stingy Woman***



Once there was a village woman, an innkeeper’s wife, who was very rich. It never occurred to her that she would die one day, and so she never contributed anything to the community—no charity, no alms, nothing. The villagers, therefore, watched her like a hawk and waited for a chance to get even.

Well, no one is immortal. Her husband—God keep us from the same—her husband died. Naturally he had to be buried. But she, stingy woman that she was, devised a scheme to save the cost of burying him.

Luck was with her, because a butcher who used to come to her inn to buy cattle and fowl was there on the night her husband died. She took the butcher into another room, gave him food and strong drink, and got him good and drunk. Really very drunk.

Then she put him to bed. A drunken man—does he have any idea of what’s happening to him? She dressed her husband’s corpse in the butcher’s clothes and dressed the butcher in white graveclothes. He, poor sodden fellow, slept through it all.

When she was finished, she sent word to his wife that he had died at the inn. The members of the burial society arrived. Well, what was to be done? They could hardly demand money from the butcher’s impoverished wife. So they carried the corpse out and buried it. And that’s how the stingy woman got her husband buried without spending a penny.

Some two or three days later, the butcher woke up and saw that he was dressed in white. Wondering what sort of trouble he had gotten into, he ran off to his wife. (Isn’t it the truth? When trouble comes, that’s what men do.(

“Sheyne,” he called, “open the door. It’s me.”

“Oh, woe, oh sorrow. What do you want of me? Go back to your resting place.”

“Dear wife, what are you talking about? What’s happened to you?”

She shrieked, “Go back! Go back to your resting place.”

Seeing that she would not let him in, he ran off to the rabbi. “Rabbi, open up,” he said.

“My son,” said the rabbi, “you have received all the proper rites due a pious Jew. Go back to your resting place.”

The butcher, finding how bad things were and seeing that no one would let him get near, went to the cemetery. Where else could he go?

Meanwhile, though he was in the graveyard, the butcher grew terribly hungry. He looked around (it was early in the morning( and saw local women passing by with baked goods in baskets. He leaped out at them. When they saw what they thought was a dead man, they dropped their baskets and ran off, leaving him with plenty to eat. Then a villager who was carrying eggs came along. As soon as he saw the butcher, he dropped his basket of eggs and ran off. So the butcher sat at his ease, dining happily on bakery goods and eggs. Just then someone carrying a little barrel of brandy drove up. Seeing what he thought was a corpse, he dropped the barrel and ran off. So now the butcher had loaves of bread, eggs, and brandy.

But sooner or later, things turn bad. He couldn’t sit there forever. So he went once more to the rabbi’s house: “Rabbi, what’s going on here? I’m a living person. What does everyone have against me?”

The rabbi asked, “Where have you been? Where do you come from?”

The butcher explained that he had gone to the inn. That the woman had gotten him drunk. That he had slept for three days. That when he woke up, he found himself dressed in white. “When I came home to my wife, she cried, ‘Go back to your resting place.’ Then I came to you, and the same thing happened.”

Finally everyone understood the innkeeper’s trick. There was an uproar in the town, and this time they decided to make her pay. The town trustees directed that her husband’s grave be dug up at her expense and that the corpse be carried back to her home. And so for once, she had to pay many times over for her stinginess.