# ***In Heaven and Hell***



Borekh bar Zorekh and Berl bar Shmerl were business partners in St. Petersburg. They were as close as brothers, but they had to part because the business made it necessary for one of them to move to Moscow. So, taking heaven and earth as their witnesses, they swore an oath that whoever died first would return to tell his friend what it was like in the “other” world.

It happened one day that Berl was in the street when he saw a man on horseback coming toward him, and the rider was Borekh. “Stop!” shouted Berl, “Stop! Stop!” but the horseman went by and disappeared. Though Berl jumped into a cab and pursued him, Borekh was not to be found.

“Something’s not right,” thought Berl. And so he sent a telegram to Moscow asking for news. The reply informed him that Borekh had died, and that his funeral had taken place at precisely the moment when Berl saw the rider. And so Berl was confident that he would soon hear from the other world. But a year went by, then a second, a third. And still nothing.

One day when Berl was on a boulevard in St. Petersburg, his dead friend Borekh came up, took him by the elbow, and started to lead him away. “God preserve me,” said Berl. “Tell me how it is with you, brother, and then let me go home.” But Borekh made no reply. He continued to lead Berl by the arm through fields and woods until at last they came to a desert. “There,” said Borekh, pointing, “you will find a cave. Walk ten yards down and then ten yards up and you’ll come to the Garden of Eden. That’s where you must ask for me.” Then he disappeared.

Berl did as he had been told and entered the Garden of Eden, which turned out to be a tumbledown hut. Inside were a number of men reciting their prayers. It was raining, and water dripped into the room through the thatch. The place was dark, filthy, slippery. “Dear God in heaven,” thought Berl, “this is the Garden of Eden?”

Then he asked, “Where can I find Borekh bar Zorekh?”

“In the next room,” came the reply.

So Berl went into the next room where, seated on rickety benches before wobbly bookstands, he found a number of men studying Torah. In still another room he came upon a group of Hasidim sitting beside a broken brandy bottle, singing wordless tunes or going into ecstasies. “Is Borekh bar Zorekh here?” Berl asked. “Oh, he’s in hell,” came the reply.

“In hell?” said Berl to himself. “And this is what you call heaven?” Aloud, he said, “And where is this hell of yours?”

“Go that way,” someone said. “You’ll find another cave. Crawl ten yards down and then ten yards up and you’ll come to it.”

Well, Berl crawled—what else could he do?—down and then up and finally emerged from the cave and looked around. Amazing! A building forty cubits high, forty cubits wide. A palace, just like the riding hall in Mohilev, with a soldier in front of it wearing a fine uniform and carrying a shiny rifle.

Berl asked the soldier, “This is hell?”

“Yes.”

Berl went in. He came to a huge, magnificently decorated hall. An orchestra was playing, and young men and women were dancing.

“Has anyone seen Borekh bar Zorekh?” asked Berl.

“He’s in the next room,” came the reply.

Berl went into the next room and found a group of people seated around a table playing cards and drinking cognac. But Borekh was not among them. “In the next room,” he was told, so Berl went into a third room and there found him, Borekh bar Zorekh, his partner, sprawled like a king in an armchair, a glass of tea in one hand, a cigar in the other.

“Hey,” cried Berl, “is this what you call hell? And you call that other place the Garden of Eden? Why the devil didn’t you let me know how well things are going for you? And why did you have to walk me through all those dreary wastes?”

Borekh said, “How well things are going for me? Is that what you say? Ah, brother, look closely at my lips and gums. Do you see how seared they are?

“Do you remember how on Sabbath afternoons, we used to light the samovar so we could drink hot tea on the Sabbath? And how we smoked cigars on the Sabbath? Well, at the instant I died, I was set down beside a steaming samovar and a cigar was shoved into my mouth. And my doom is that I must alternately take sips of scalding tea and choking puffs from the cigar. Sip and puff. Sip and puff. Without stopping, without end.”

“But what about the dancers in the great hall? And those others drinking cognac and playing cards?”

“Ah, it’s the same for them. ‘Play and drink. Drink and play. Dance, brother, dance.’ Should any of them tire of dancing, there’s a tormenting angel with a whip who lashes away, crying, ‘Dance, brother! One, two. Hup. No rest for you!’ ”

The moral of the story is clear, isn’t it? You smoke and light the samovar on the Sabbath at your peril.