# ***The Peer Man’s Rubble***



On a Sabbath many, many years ago, a poor man went to the synagogue to pray. He saw a pile of gold lying in the synagogue courtyard, but not wishing to violate the Sabbath, he left it alone. When he returned for the early-evening service, he saw the gold again, and again left it where it lay. However, on Saturday night, when he left the synagogue and could at last touch money, all he found was a single ruble. He took it home and gave it to his wife.

In the same town there was a rich man who had to make a long sea voyage to acquire merchandise. The poor man’s wife gave the ruble to the rich man and asked him to buy something for her. On his journey the rich man bought many goods, but he forgot about the woman’s ruble until his ship was about to sail. He hurried ashore thinking, “I’ll buy the first thing that comes my way.”

He met a beggar carrying a sack. The rich man asked him, “What have you got in the sack?”

The beggar replied, “Three young cats.”

“How much do you want for them?”

“One ruble.”

So the rich man bought the cats and sailed away. A storm came up at sea and the ship was blown into the harbor of a city full of very wicked people. When a stranger came to their shores, their practice was to lock him in a building swarming with mice, who then tore him to bits. They threw the rich man into that building, but he turned his cats loose and they killed many of the mice and chased the others away.

In the morning the people found the rich man very much alive and with three cats for company. The people said, “How much do you want for those cats?” He replied, “Three sacks full of gold. Also, I want to be sent home.” They gave him three sacks of gold for the cats and sent him home.

Safely home, he asked the poor man’s wife where she had gotten her ruble. She said, “My husband gave it to me.” He asked the husband, who replied, “I saw a pile of gold in the courtyard of the synagogue, but because it was the Sabbath I didn’t take any. In the evening, all I found was a single ruble.”

The rich man brought a sack of gold and poured it out before the poor man. “Was the pile of gold you saw as big as this?” he asked. “Bigger,” said the poor man. The rich man poured out a second sack of gold, and the poor man said, “Still bigger.” Then he poured out a third sack, and the poor man said, “That’s the size of the pile I saw.” So the rich man gave him all three sacks of gold and the poor man became very rich.