# ***Set a Trap for Another***



Once upon a time there was a merchant whose dishonest clerk stole some of his goods. The merchant, seeing the theft, decided to get even.

When the clerk’s wife gave birth to a son, the merchant sent a peasant to the clerk’s house to steal the child and bring it to him.

The merchant put the baby in a chest and carried it a great distance away. Then he threw it under a bridge not far from a hut.

The man who lived in the hut was a fisherman. As he passed by the bridge, his eyes fell on the chest. He took it home, opened it and found the child. The fisherman and his wife decided to raise the child.

A considerable time went by and the child grew into a handsome youth. It happened once that the merchant spent the night in the fisherman’s hut. Here he saw the youth who greatly pleased him, and he decided to give him his daughter for a wife; and it was arranged that when the merchant returned from abroad, the young man would come to his home.

Later that night, the fisherman told the merchant how he had found the boy and decided to raise him. The merchant, remembering his clerk’s son, regretted promising his daughter in marriage to this young man. But he said nothing to the fisherman. Instead he wrote a letter to his wife instructing her to hire a peasant to kill the young man. He sealed the letter with wax and gave it to the youth to deliver.

When the young man came to the town, he decided to spend the night in the synagogue. As he was falling asleep, the letter fell out of his pocket and the rabbi picked it up. The rabbi opened the letter, read it and then tore it up. The rabbi wrote a second letter instructing the wife to welcome the young man warmly.

In the morning, the young man went off to see the merchant’s wife and gave her the letter. A few days later, the vengeful merchant returned from his foreign travels and was surprised to see that the young man was still alive.

This time, he paid a peasant a large sum to dig a pit beside the door into which the young man should fall so that he might be killed. But the young man left the house through a second door and did not fall into the pit.

The merchant, seeing that the youth was no longer in the house, went to inspect the pit, but he slipped and fell into it himself. The peasant, unaware that it was the merchant in the pit, slew him.

He who digs a pit for another—falls into it himself.

*Ver es grobt a grub far yenem, falt in im aleyn arayn*.