# ***A Succos Tale***



A father had two sons. One was both pious and good. He always shared whatever he had, and he was so generous that he sold his own houses and lands so that he could give money to the poor. His brother, on the other hand, was a stingy ne’er-do-well.

Once at Hoshana Rabba time, the seventh day of the Succos holiday, when everyone’s fate for the coming year is irrevocably sealed, the generous man’s wife handed him their last ten rubles and said, “Go to the market and buy what the children need for the festival.”

As the man walked along, he met the trustees of the charity fund. “How fortunate to see you,” they said. “It happens that we’re collecting money for a poor bride. Perhaps you can help.”

“Of course,” he said. “Of course.” And he gave them the ten rubles.

“Oh Lord,” he thought, when he realized what he had done, “how can I possibly go home and face my wife empty-handed?”

Instead he walked sadly to the *besmedresh*, where he saw children playing with *esroygim*. He gathered the citrons together and put them in a sack, which he slung over his shoulder. Then he carried it down to the river and boarded a ship that was going to the capital city.

Now the king of that country was very sick, and none of his doctors could find a remedy that would help him. One night he dreamed that he would be cured if he ate the citrons over which Jews prayed and uttered blessings during the Succos holiday.

The next day the king issued a decree: “Let citrons be found!”

Soon afterward it happened that some of the king’s servants went to the riverbank to search the passing boats that came from far away. They hoped to find a merchant who had citrons to sell, and indeed, on one of the boats they came upon the *tsadek*, the pious man, sitting on his sack.

“Hey,” they said, “what sort of merchandise do you have in the sack?”

“I’m not a merchant,” he replied. “I’m just a poor man, and I have nothing to sell.”

“Let’s see what you’ve got,” they said. With that they searched his sack and found the citrons. “Hey,” they said, “what do you call these?”

“Those … oh, those are citrons over which Jews recite prayers and blessings during the Succos holidays.”

“Well now, as it happens, that’s just what we’re looking for,” said the servants. With that they took the poor man and his merchandise to the king. And the king ate the citrons and was cured.

To reward the pious man, the king commanded that his sack be filled with gold. Then he said, “Is there anything else you want? You have only to ask.”

“It would be nice,” said the pious man, “if I were allowed to buy my properties back. And … and … oh yes. If it’s not too much trouble, would you decree that the people come out to greet me when I get back to my home town? Not, God forbid, because I want honor for myself, but because I want them all to know how you were healed by God’s miracle and how I was helped through you.”

“Let your wish be my decree,” said the king. And that’s what happened. When the pious man arrived at his home town, the populace welcomed him with great honor.

The *tsadek*’s mean-spirited brother was among those in the crowd. As he and his children approached the riverbank, a sudden wave caught them up and dragged them into the water—where they drowned.

And the generous *tsadek* inherited all their property and lived as a wealthy man all the days of his life.