# ***A Passover Tale***



Once upon a time there were two brothers, one rich and the other poor. And they had an old mother who lived with the poor son. Well, it was just before Passover and the poor man had none of the things necessary for the Passover service. So he said to his mother, “I’ll tell you what: I’ll carry you to the rabbi’s house where we’ll stand under one of his windows and listen to him conduct the service.” So the old mother set herself on his shoulders, and they went to the rabbi’s house and heard the whole service under a window.

Meanwhile the poor man’s wife, who had been sleeping, woke up and didn’t know where she was. There were signs of wealth everywhere. She was lying on a luxurious bed, and her children were dressed in fine clothes. The table was richly set and piled with every sort of fine food. And there was a crowd of cooks preparing marvelous dishes.

Just then her husband, the poor brother, came home with his mother on his shoulders. He too didn’t recognize his house, since there was a mansion where it had stood. So he went around by another street, but the mansion was still there. He said to his mother, “We might as well go inside. They won’t beat us if we do.”

He carried her in, and his wife, dressed in velvet and silks, hurried to greet him. The children looked like the children of noblemen, but they came up and kissed their father and grandmother. Then all took their places at the table and conducted the Passover service as God had commanded.

The next morning the rich brother remembered his mother and brother. He called a servant and, giving him a few pieces of *matse* and a small flask of wine, said, “Take this to my brother, the poor man.” So the servant went to the poor brother’s house and came upon the mansion. He entered and found the poor brother and his wife and children dressed in fine clothes. The servant was amazed, but he said nothing. He took out the few pieces of *matse* and the flask of wine and gave them to the poor brother who said, “I’m not poor anymore, so I don’t need these. Now I’m richer than he is.”

The servant went back to his master, returned the bits of *matse* and the flask of wine, and said, “Your brother has become a wealthy man.” The rich brother refused to believe it and said, “No doubt you stumbled into some wealthy man’s house.”

The servant said, “Go see for yourself.”

The rich brother went to the mansion and saw that the story was indeed true. He asked his brother, “How did you become so rich?”

“God helped me,” was the answer. The rich brother, seeing that he would learn nothing this way, thought, “I’ll find out more from a woman.”

He went home and told his wife, “Go to my brother’s house and get his wife to tell you what made them so rich.” And when she went to the mansion, the poor brother’s wife said her husband had carried his mother on his shoulders to the rabbi’s house so they could hear the Passover service. “God Himself then blessed us with riches,” she said.



On the second day of Passover, the rich brother paid a visit to his mother. “Set yourself on my shoulders,” he told her. “I’ll take you to the rabbi’s house, and we can stand under a window and hear the service.”

His mother said, “My son, why should we do that? Your brother was a poor man and had to stand under the rabbi’s window to hear the service, but you are rich.” The rich brother pressed her so hard, however, that at last she climbed onto his shoulders. And off they went to the rabbi’s house to stand under one of his windows and listen.

In the middle of the service, they heard sounds of bells, people running, and shouts of “Fire! Fire!” The rich brother asked, “Where’s the fire?” And he was told that it was such-and-such a rich man’s house—his own. He flung his mother off his shoulders so violently that she died on the spot. Then away he ran to the fire, but he couldn’t save a thing. It all burned, and he became a poor man.

And for the rest of his days the poor brother lived a rich and happy life with his wife and children.