# ***The Leper Boy and Elijah the Prophet***



Once upon a time a poor leper boy used to sit on a box in the middle of a great square, and people who went by gave him what bits of food they could. One day a carriage drove up and out stepped a man—it was Elijah the Prophet—who said to the boy, “I’m an uncle of yours and I’m going to make you respectable.”

“Good, Uncle,” said the boy.

Then Elijah took the boy with him in the carriage and they rode off to a forest. There he pulled the boy’s hat off and threw it up into a tree, and the boy’s skin turned clean and healthy. Then the Prophet washed the boy, dressed him in fine new clothes, and had him apprenticed to a baker.

Some time later Elijah visited the boy and asked, “How is it, being a baker?”

“Not so good,” said the boy. “I often burn my hands.”

“Well, what would you like to be?” asked Elijah.

“Uncle dear,” said the boy, “maybe I’d like to be a tailor.”

So Elijah apprenticed him to a tailor.

Some time later the prophet visited the boy and asked, “How is it, being a tailor?”

“Not so good, Uncle dear. I keep sticking myself with the needles.”

“Well, what would you like to be?” asked Elijah.

“Uncle dear, maybe I’d like to be a shoemaker.”

So Elijah apprenticed him to a shoemaker.

Some time later he visited the boy and asked, “And how is it, being a shoemaker?”

“Uncle dear, being a shoemaker isn’t working out too well either. I keep banging my knees and smearing my hands.”

“Well, what would you like to be?” asked Elijah.

“I’d like to be a barber-surgeon.”

So Elijah had him trained as a barber-surgeon.

Some time later he visited the boy and asked, “How is it, being a barber-surgeon?”

“Uncle dear, not good. I’m at everyone’s beck and call. I’m constantly running around setting leeches on patients.”

“Well, what would you like to be?” asked Elijah.

“I think I’d like to be a doctor,” replied the boy. And so Elijah had him trained as a doctor.

Some time later he visited the boy and asked, “And how is it, being a doctor?”

“Uncle dear, that’s not so good either. For a doctor there’s neither night nor day. I’m constantly running to the homes of my patients.”

“Well,” said Elijah, “what would you like to be?”

“Uncle dear,” said the boy, “I think I’d like to be a merchant.”

So Elijah had him trained as a merchant. But being a merchant didn’t please the boy either, and he asked for a career in the army. Elijah had the boy trained successively as a company commander, a battalion commander, a brigade commander, a corps commander, and an army commander. Always the boy was unhappy, either because he was too low on the chain of command or because his responsibilities were too heavy.

Finally Elijah said, “Well then, what would you like to be, my son?”

“I’d like to be the czar,” said the boy.

“Very well,” said Elijah. “Be the czar and rule the country well.”

Some time later Elijah visited the boy and asked, “Well, what’s it like, being the czar?”

“Not too good,” replied the boy. “I’ve got to worry about the whole country.”

“Well, my son, what would you like to be?”

“Uncle,” replied the boy, “Maybe I’d like to be God Himself.”

“Well,” said Elijah, “let’s go up to Heaven, and we’ll hear what God has to say about it.”

“Perhaps now you’ll understand,” said God to Elijah the Prophet, “that sometimes I actually know what I’m doing. And now you, Elijah, come over here with me. As for you … you leper … creep back to your box where you belong.”