# ***The Trustees***



Once there was a man and his wife, Khaim and Shifre, who had two children. One Saturday morning while Khaim was off in the synagogue, the children were taken suddenly ill and died.

When Khaim came home, he sat down to eat and said to Shifre, “Where can the children be?”

“They’re playing with other children in the neighbor’s courtyard,” Shifre replied.

After Khaim finished his *tsholnt*, his Sabbath bean and barley stew, he went back to the synagogue and stayed for the late-evening prayers. When he returned, he sat down to eat but the food somehow did not agree with him. So he asked Shifre again, “Have the children been home since this morning?”

“Yes, they were only just here. They ate and then went back out to play.”

While Khaim ate, Shifre asked his opinion about a matter of religious law. “If someone leaves something in the care of someone else and then later comes to reclaim it, is the person to whom the thing has been entrusted required to give it back?”

Khaim said, “What a question! Of course he must give it back. At once, without another word.”

“In that case,” Shifre said, “come with me into the other room. I want to show you something.”

When Khaim followed her and saw that the children were dead, he began to tear his hair.

“Hush,” Shifre said. “You said it yourself. If one entrusts something to another person and then comes and asks for it again, it must be given back. God entrusted the children to us and now He has taken them back again.”