# ***A Tragic Tale***



Once upon a time there was a brother and sister who were very rich. Because they did not want their fortune divided, they decided they would never marry but would live with each other.

The sister became pregnant, and people in the town began to talk. Fingers were pointed at the couple as at the most sinful pair in the world. And when the day came that the sister gave birth, anger blazed up against them so that they had to move away. They sold their possessions and divided the money, and each of them went to a different town. In her new home the woman let it be known that she was a young widow. And to hide the fact of her sin, she decided to get rid of the infant. She wrapped it up and put it into a basket along with two thousand rubles. Then she wrote a letter explaining that the child was Jewish and that the money would belong to whoever raised him.

After the woman had left the basket at the door of the synagogue, the first person to come along was the *melamed*, the schoolteacher. He unwrapped the baby boy, found the money and the letter, and decided to raise the child himself. With the help of a wet nurse, the infant thrived and grew.

The child was hardly three years old when he asked to be sent to *kheyder*, where he soon showed signs of genius. This made the other children unhappy, so they called him “bastard.” One day when he was demonstrating formidable scholarly powers and the rabbi was praising him, another pupil called out, “If we’d been found in the synagogue, we’d be as smart as he is.”

Now, this distressed the boy terribly, and, with tears in his eyes, he insisted that the teacher tell him the truth. The *melamed*, seeing that it would be worse if he did not, showed him the letter and told him everything. So the boy packed his things and took the two thousand rubles, which the teacher had saved for him. Then he went away to study in a distant city, where nobody knew his secret.

When he was nineteen, his mother too came to that city. She was very rich and wanted a husband, but because she was already some forty years old, she could not expect to marry a wealthy young man. So she went to the head of the yeshiva, who proposed the nineteen-year-old genius to her as a groom. And soon they were married.

But sometime after their wedding, when she was returning from the *mikve*, the ritual bath, certain signs appeared in her that showed she was impure. The young man pleaded with her to tell him if she had any sin on her conscience, and finally she told him everything.

Early the next morning the young man went away, taking with him what was left of the two thousand rubles. He wandered through villages and towns until he came to a village inn, and there he stayed.

By day he was not seen at all; he appeared only at night. The innkeeper thought his behavior suspicious and began to spy on him. He found that the young man usually walked far into the forest, put on a *talis* and *tfiln*, and beat his chest and wept as he prayed. At last the innkeeper told him that it was a sin to punish oneself so severely, but the young man explained that he was doing penance.

A while later, the young penitent noticed a vacant cellar near the inn. He begged the innkeeper to lock him in there and throw the key away. The innkeeper wouldn’t hear of it, but when the young man offered him a hundred rubles, he allowed himself to be persuaded. He gave the penitent two loaves of bread and a pitcher of water, locked the cellar, and threw the key away. Then he forgot about him.

It happened that a *tsadek* died in a certain town and the townspeople did not know who was worthy to take his place. But before the saintly man expired, he told them to send the most distinguished of the congregation out to search for a man locked in a cellar, because that man was worthy to be their rabbi.

The townspeople traveled here and there until they found the penitent in his cellar. They asked him to be their rabbi, but at first he refused. When they explained who it was that had sent them, he told them to come back in a month. At that time he agreed to become the rabbi of their town, and people began traveling to him from all over to get his blessing or his advice.

Among them came the woman who was both his mother and his wife. He had a divine presentiment that she would arrive, and he gave orders that no richly dressed woman was to be admitted into his presence. She saw, however, that there seemed to be some objection to her wealthy clothes, so she dressed herself anew like a poor woman. When she was at his door, he cried out, “*Reboyne shel oylem*, O Lord of the Universe, why dost Thou punish me?” And she fell dead on the spot.

He sat for the prescribed days of mourning on her behalf, and when he was asked why, he replied that it was because she had died in his house.