# ***Upon Me***



There once was a Polish noblewoman who had a large estate. There was a hut in one of her woods in which an old woman lived. She was a lonely old woman who had no relatives and who lived on what bits of cooked and baked food the rich woman gave her. But the old woman never said humbly, “Thank you, my Lady.” And this bothered the noblewoman—how could a person be so ungrateful as never to say thank you?

She thought about it and said to herself, “I’ll teach her the difference between ‘mine’ and ‘yours’.” So she baked her a large handsome braided loaf of white bread, a *koyletsh*, into which she put poison. When the old woman came, the lady gave her the loaf. The old woman was so pleased by the size and quality of the loaf that this time she said twice, “May the Lord repay you, my Lady,” and went away. When she was gone the lady burst out laughing. “We’ll see whether he’ll repay me or you.”

The old woman meanwhile, when she got home, was so pleased with the loaf that she decided to hide it. A little while later the lady’s son was hunting in the forest and was caught in the rain. Remembering that there was an old woman who lived in a hut nearby, he ran to it.

The old woman was so delighted to see him that she took the hidden loaf out so that she could treat him with it. When he had eaten of the loaf he felt very sick. The old woman was frightened and ran to the lady’s house. “Lady, what have you done? What misfortune have you brought down upon me?”

The lady understood at once what had happened and said, “Upon me. Upon me.”