# ***The Iron Chest***



One day a *parnes*, a community leader, was traveling home from a large city, and it happened that he had to go by night. Driving along, he fell asleep and his horses took a wrong turn. He woke and saw that he was lost, but it was too dark to find the right road. So he drove straight on until he came upon two men who were digging a hole. At first he feared they might be robbers, but it turned out that they were respectable peasants. When he had greeted them, he asked, “What are you digging for?”

“We’re digging up a chest filled with gold coins.”

“And whose chest is it?”

“It belongs to your son-in-law,” was the reply.

“Can you change some copper coins into gold for me?” asked the man.

“Certainly. Why not?”

He gave them forty copper coins and they gave him three gold ones in exchange.

By then it was almost dawn, and the *parnes*, taking care to remember the place where the peasants were digging, drove away. After great difficulty he found the right road again and made his way home. He told no one of his adventures, however.

Several years went by. The *parnes* had a daughter for whom various matches had been proposed, but she had rejected them all. This made her father unhappy, because some of the young men were very rich. As time passed, the *parnes* became ever more impatient to know who his son-in-law would be.

He thought and thought about it and finally settled on a plan. He dropped one of his gold coins on a path that led to the synagogue, vowing that whoever picked it up would be his son-in-law.

The next morning when he went to check, the coin was gone. He dropped a second coin and it too disappeared; then he dropped a third, with the same results. So the *parnes* announced in the synagogue that he had lost three gold coins that had been left to him by his grandfather and that he wanted whoever had found them to come forward.

Now, a water carrier lived in that town, a man with a blind father whom he led to the synagogue three times a day. And it was this water carrier who had found the gold coins. He acknowledged in the synagogue that he had found them, then hurried home and brought them back to the *parnes*.

The *parnes* returned to his own home greatly dejected. To think that he would have a water carrier for a son-in-law! A man so unschooled that he hardly knew how to hold a pen. Still, to honor his vow he went to the water carrier’s parents and asked them to let their son live with him. “I’ll teach him how to write properly, and furthermore, I’ll put him to work in my business.”

But the water carrier’s parents refused, because the blind father needed his son to guide him to the synagogue. The *parnes*, however, promised to hire someone to do that.

So the water carrier went to live with the *parnes* and studied diligently, and it was not long before he learned a great deal. Nor was it long before he and the daughter were in love, and they decided to marry, even though they feared that it would make the *parnes* unhappy.

After the wedding the son-in-law and his bride continued to live in the *parnes*’s home. One evening the *parnes* took a spade and asked his son-in-law to go with him to the place where he had seen the men digging long ago. He pointed out the exact location, but though the son-in-law dug and dug, he found nothing. Finally they went home.

Nevertheless, the *parnes* was determined to have a wealthy son-in-law. So he made him go back to the spot where he had dug before and dig even deeper. Again without success. This time the *parnes* was so angry that he drove the young couple out of his house.

The man and his bride rented a cellar, where they set up a little ironmonger’s shop to earn their living. Once when the husband was away, a peasant came into the shop and asked for three whetstones to sharpen his scythes. He explained that he couldn’t pay money, but that he had an iron chest at home which he would give in return. “Good,” said the wife. Soon afterward the peasant came back bringing an old iron chest all covered with cobwebs. He tossed it into the shop and then went away in a great hurry.

When the husband, the former water carrier, came home that evening, his wife told him the whole story. So he went to work on the dusty chest and, after some struggle, wrenched it open. You can imagine their astonishment when they saw it was crammed with gold coins exactly like the ones he had picked up on the path to the synagogue. The husband and wife ran out of the shop in search of the peasant, but he was nowhere to be found.

So the two of them went into town to see the rabbi. They gave him a great deal of money and told him to build a large synagogue of the finest materials. But until it was finished, they said, he must keep their identity as donors a secret.

And that’s what the rabbi did. The synagogue was built and some three years later it was ready. The entire congregation gathered to get their seat assignments, but two seats, one in the men’s section and one in the women’s, were left unassigned.

The *parnes* too came to the synagogue and greeted people warmly. His daughter and son-in-law stood off by themselves, for the *parnes* had not spoken to them since he drove them from his house. The rabbi delivered an address from the *bime*. Then the young couple were led to the unassigned seats, and the rabbi announced that they were the ones who had donated the money for the synagogue.

The *parnes* fell at his son-in-law’s feet and begged his forgiveness. The congregation asked the couple to tell them the whole story of the whetstones and the chest and the fortune. Then the *parnes* told everyone how the peasants had foretold that he would have a rich son-in-law. The father and his daughter’s husband were reconciled and became good friends. And the young couple lived out the rest of their lives in honor and prosperity.