# ***Holding On to One-Quarter of My World***



In the course of a great flood, a boatman helped a *tsadek* across a river. The holy man, seeing what an uncouth fellow the boatman was, pitied him and felt inclined to lecture him a little. “My son,” he said, “Is this really your trade?”

“Oh, I also work on the timber rafts,” said the boatman.

“But do you at least *koyveya itim letoyre*?” asked the holy man.

“What does that mean, Rebbe?”

“I’m merely asking whether you take time for studying the Torah—even so much as a chapter in the Mishnah.” 



“Rebbe, I can’t pay expenses with the Mishnah. I have to feed my children.”

“Ah, ah, ah,” groaned the holy man. “A Jew without study is deprived of a quarter of his world. And I’m sorry to say that’s what you’ve done. But tell me, do you at least recite the Psalms?”

“Rebbe, if I recited the Psalms, who’d carry the logs?”

“Ah, ah, ah,” groaned the rebbe. “If only you recited the Psalms. Because a Jew who doesn’t recite the Psalms has wasted another quarter of his world.”

A while later the rebbe said, “Tell me, my son, do you recite your prayers?”

“A flood washed away the hut where I kept my prayer shawl and prayer book. And now I work with a troop of raftsmen, so I don’t get to pray.”

“Ah, ah, ah. So you’ve wasted still another quarter of your world.”

Just then the boat struck a rock and capsized. “Rebbe,” cried the boatman, “can you swim?”

“No,” groaned the sinking rebbe.

“In that case, you’ve wasted all four quarters of your world. But never mind. Grab on to me and I’ll pull your whole world to safety.”