# ***Wisdom or Luck?***



Wisdom, meeting Luck one day, got into an argument about which of them was more powerful.

Wisdom said that nothing can be accomplished in the world without wisdom, whereas everything is possible with it. Luck, on the other hand, said, “What good is wisdom without luck? An ounce of luck is worth more than a pound of wisdom.” But Wisdom insisted that only wisdom is necessary to accomplish anything.

As they stood quarreling, it happened that somewhere in the world a boy was born. Wisdom and Luck agreed that one of them should enter into him, and then they would see what he could achieve.

So Wisdom entered into the boy, who was born to a very poor woman who was unable to provide him with any sort of education. But when he was fourteen or fifteen, a goldsmith took pity on him and made him an apprentice. The boy was so clever that it was not long before he became more skillful than the goldsmith. Seeing that there was nothing more he could learn, the boy told his master that he wanted to leave and go to a larger city. His master was sad to be losing such a good worker, but the boy was eager to make his way in the world.

He traveled for a while until he came to the capital city, where the king lived. There he met the town’s finest tailor, who sewed for the royal family. “Let me be your apprentice,” said the boy, and the tailor agreed. Before long his master saw with astonishment that the boy was a remarkable tailor. He was continually inventing such wonderful new designs that the king wondered why his new clothes were so much better than the ones he had before. “Who is making these clothes?” the king asked the tailor.

“I am,” replied the tailor. “I spend a lot of time thinking and thinking up new and more beautiful robes for you.” The king, hearing this, rewarded the tailor richly.

Now, the king’s only daughter was so brilliant that no one had been able to find her a husband as clever as she. “I don’t care what rank in life he has. If he can make me talk, I’ll marry him. But let every man who wants to marry me take warning: if he’s not clever enough, it’s off with his head.” Her father had no choice but to abide by her terms.

Naturally every eligible young man wanted to marry her. For in addition to brilliance and birth, she had extraordinary beauty. So the first of her suitors were well-educated, important young men who thought themselves her equal. But one and all were unsuccessful. She listened to what they had to say and made no reply. The suitors, one and all, had their heads chopped off.

Hearing about the princess, the tailor’s apprentice decided that he would seek to win her hand. “I’ll find a way to make her talk,” he said. “Anyhow what do I have to lose, sad and poor as I am?”

He went to the king’s palace and asked to be admitted. “I’ve come to talk with the princess,” he said, “and get her to talk to me.”

He was led into the room where the princess sat, but he acted as if he had not seen her. Instead, he looked around the room and, catching sight of a candelabrum, addressed it: “Good morning, Candelabrum. I have something to tell you, and I’d like your opinion about it when I’m done.” With that he launched into a tale.

“Once upon a time, dear Candelabrum, there were three men who lived in a village: a woodcarver, a tailor, and a teacher. But there was not enough work in their village, so they decided to take their tools and go out into the wide world to look for employment.

“They traveled on and on until they came to a forest, where night soon fell. They had to sleep where they were, but because they were afraid of wild animals, they agreed that each of them would stand guard for two hours.

“The first watch was taken by the woodcarver. It was not long before he looked about for something to while away the time. He examined the pieces of wood lying around and found a fine log, which he carved into the form of a woman. He finished the statue just as his two hours were up, so he woke the tailor and went to sleep.

“The tailor, like the woodworker, looked about for something to do. His eye fell on the statue of the naked woman, so he took his scissors and needles and several yards of cloth and sat down to sew a dress. When it was finished, he clothed the statue in it. Just then his two hours were up, so he woke the teacher and went to sleep.

“The teacher too looked about for something to do. Suddenly he saw a lovely woman in a beautiful dress, but when he spoke to her, she remained still and silent. It seemed too bad that so splendid a woman should be unable to talk. So he sat down beside her and undertook to teach her to speak. And he was so skillful and patient that she began to learn.

“Meanwhile the dawn came and his companions awoke and saw him in conversation with a beautiful, well-dressed woman. When each of them recognized his handiwork, he wanted her for himself. So of course all three men quarreled. The woodcarver said, ‘I carved her out of wood, so she belongs to me.’ The tailor said, ‘What? She was nothing but a naked piece of wood when I found her. I clothed her, so she belongs to me.’ The teacher said, ‘What good is a beautifully clothed dummy? I taught her to speak, so she belongs to me.’ And they went round and round. Now, dear Candelabrum, what do you think? To whom does she belong?”

The princess, who had naturally listened to the whole story and admired the boy’s cleverness, spoke up: “Of course she belongs to the man who made her talk.”

The youth, however, was cleverer than he was lucky. Servants had been posted in the room to report whether the boy made the princess talk and they simply didn’t hear her when she spoke. So they concluded that the boy had failed like all the others. Nor were they surprised, since he was after all so poor. And without delay they led him off to the executioner.

Just as the sword was raised to behead the boy, Luck turned to Wisdom and said, “Well, see what you’ve accomplished with your wisdom. You did your best, but when it comes right down to it, without me you can do nothing. So let’s trade places; in a few minutes I’ll get more done than you’ve accomplished in the boy’s whole lifetime.”

No sooner had Luck entered into him than the princess chanced to walk out onto her balcony. Seeing that the clever boy was being led to execution, she halted the procession and sent word to the king. This, she informed him, was the young man who had provoked a reply from her, and this was the one she would marry.

The king commanded that the servants who had been about to behead the youth should themselves be executed. And the princess married the tailor’s apprentice and they lived happily ever after.

And that was how Luck proved that he was stronger than Wisdom.