# ***The Poor Rabbi and His Three Daughters***



There was a poor rabbi who had three daughters. They owned but a single dress among them, so that two daughters always had to stay in bed on top of the oven while one showed herself in town.

Their house was cold and damp. There was only a crust of bread lying in a cupboard drawer. Scratching about on the floor was a scrawny rooster, not one of your better-class roosters at all. Meanwhile the rabbi sat in a corner, singing a rapturous melody as he studied.

One day a stranger who wore a *shtrayml* and had the look of a holy man came in and greeted the rabbi. He sat down and asked whether there might be something to eat.

The rabbi found the crust of bread and gave it to him. Then he called one of the daughters lying on the oven and told her to have the rooster killed so that they could prepare food for the holy man.

The girl put on the dress, tucked the rooster under her arm, and started off to the butcher’s.

But the rooster broke loose and started to fly away. The girl ran after it, trying to catch it. She ran and the rooster kept leaping and fluttering away. They came to a fence where she was sure she had him, but the creature flew right over it.

So she tried to climb the fence, but her dress caught and the skirt ripped from top to bottom.

At this she wept and wrung her hands. How could she show herself in town with such a tear in her dress? Then she tried to find the rooster, but there was no sign of him anywhere.

Her heart ached and tears gushed from her eyes. How, in her condition, would she even get home?

When she had cried herself out, she stood leaning against the fence, utterly spiritless.

Meanwhile night fell, but she continued to stand alone in the dark. All at once she caught a glimpse of something bright under the trees. And the thing grew brighter and lovelier, gleaming until it dazzled her.

She began to think of stories she had heard about hidden treasure discovered by deserving people. But she remembered too that it was frequently demons who deceived the gullible with false treasure.

Her heart pounding, she called in a trembling voice, “If that’s a real treasure, then let it come closer. If it’s the work of a demon, let it sink into the ground.”

The thing began to shine brighter and brighter, then to move closer and closer, glowing and glittering and shimmering until it was quite near.

So she picked up the ends of her torn skirt and, in spite of her fear, gathered up whole fistfuls of gold.

Back in the rabbi’s house, everyone sat wondering where she was. They were ready to send someone in search of her, but the other daughters couldn’t get down from the oven because they had no clothes.

It was very late when she finally staggered home, exhausted and with her torn skirt loaded with gold. As soon as she entered, they began to scold her. But the holy man, the guest, quieted them and told them that God had seen their poverty and suffering and had sent them a treasure to bless them.

.   .   .




 


Nakhman the tailor liked to whip out a humorous anecdote or a tune in the vestibule of the *besmedresh*, the House of Study. Sometimes I’d stray away from my grandfather, who stayed put in his corner at the back of the *besmedresh*, near the old wall clock whose pendulum went back and forth, back and forth. I’d sneak out into the vestibule and join the group of shoemakers and tailors who surrounded Nakhman, and I’d listen to his jokes and proverbs and tales.

—Memoir from Pumpyan, Lithuania, the 1920s


*S*hort tales, quips, and capers, merry and satiric, are a beloved genre of Yiddish folklore. The language is rich with synonyms like *vitsik-maysele, shpasik-maysele, khokhmele, shtuke*, and *shpitsele* for such stories. These are the tales about jesters and pranksters, shlemiels and shlimazls, clever adventurers and rascals, riddle solvers, masters of repartee and Talmudic hairsplitters. As Yehoshua Ravnitski, one of the collectors of the *vitsike-mayselekh*, pointed out, whenever people, young or old, got together for a family or holiday celebration, or just happened to meet, swapping funny anecdotes was a favorite pastime. One person began by telling a *vitsik-maysele* related to whatever was being discussed. Another capped this jest with one about the same or a similar subject, only to be followed by a third person with another “suitcase of quips”—and so it would proceed, on and on.1 And then there was the *batkhn*, the master of ceremonies at weddings, a real specialist in humorous stories. Before the ceremony he helped create a solemn mood with tear-jerking improvisations, but after the service he donned the cloak of the comic entertainer and told merry stories into the night.2

Every ethnic group seems to enjoy stories about simpletons, and some tell whole cycles of tales about entire towns of numbskulls. Thus there is the ancient Greek Abdera, the English Gotham, the Danish Molbo, and the German Schildburg. In Yiddish folklore Khelm, a real place in Poland, figures as the most famous of such towns.3 My father, born in the Ukraine in Letitshev, was fond of telling stories about *Khelemer naronim* (fools of Khelm( or, as they were affectionately, if ironically, dubbed, *Khelemer khakhomim* (wise men of Khelm(.

These “wise men of Khelm” lived in a world of their own. Children loved to hear and adults loved to tell about their absurd and inappropriate behavior. Stories like “The Hill Pushed Away” were favorites. Khelmites were sure to misread every Bible verse and misinterpret every injunction—always at great cost. They also had a penchant for ignoring reality, and a positive talent for overlooking the laws of nature, as in “The Rolling Stone” and “How Khelmites Lighted Up the Night.”

In addition to the cycle of humorous tales about the not-so-bright denizens of Khelm, Yiddish folklore also has cycles of humorous anecdotes pegged to specific, real-life *vitslers*, or pranksters. If the Khelmite fools are the subjects of jests, the *vitslers* are the creators of jests, although at times the *vitsler* pretends to be a fool himself, in a jest of his own creation. While the Khelmite misunderstands reality, the *vitsler* manipulates it.4

Each of our three *vitslers* comes from a different region: Hershele Ostropolyer from Volin in the Ukraine, Motke Khabad from Vilna in Lithuania, and Froyim Greydinger, *the galitsyaner vitsler*, from the region of Poland known as Galicia.5 Hershele Ostropolyer (1757–1811( has been described as a kind of jester at the Hasidic court of Rebbe Borukh Mezhbizher. Although some claim that Froyim Greydinger lived in the nineteenth century, others place him a century earlier, claiming that he supplied Hershele with jokes, anecdotes, and proverbs. Motke Khabad (1820–ca. 1880( is best known for his relationship with the Vilna Gaon, Elijah ben Solomon (1720–1797(, a towering figure of rabbinic Judaism and an opponent of Hasidism. According to one tradition, Motke was said to have helped raise the spirits of the Gaon. The other has it that the Vilna Gaon, angry with Motke on one occasion, “cursed” him to live by his *khokhmes*, his wit and pranks.

Hershele, Motke, and Froyim are basically poor folk whose pranks are a way of coping with poverty. They are given to mild teasing, as in “The Congregation Loves Jam,” or to droll and mischievous displays of absurd “logic,” as in “Reb Hershele and the Goose Leg.” But frequently, as in “Motke Khabad Needs a Place to Live,” a blacker humor, a darker tone of unhappy social satire underlies the tales. Like the parables told by itinerant preachers, the stories have an implicit, if not explicit, moral and often attack the bigotry and hypocrisy of the powerful within the Jewish community. It is not uncommon to find that the same tale is told now of one, now of another of these three figures.

Other tales here offer a cross section of Yiddish folk humor. Some tell about numbskulls like Khushim (“Simpleton”(, who would feel right at home in Khelm. Others are about Anyman/Anywoman: there are, for example, the shlemiel/shlimazl simpletons, like the foolish innkeeper so easily parted from his money by “The Visitor from the World Beyond”; sly scoundrels like the tailor who wanted to become a cantor; gifted riddle solvers like Moshke or “The Clever Girl”; women who demand the religious prerogatives of males and are ridiculed for doing so. There are anecdotes about misused logic, like “Then Where’s the Cat?” and misplaced conclusions, like “What Makes Tea Sweet?” which poke fun at casuistry and parody the subtle argumentation ( *pilpl* ( employed in studying the Talmud. In addition, there are the lovely cante fables, in which a melody becomes part of the story.6 The teller repeats a song again and again within the frame of the narrative. This way the audience can learn the tune and sing along.