# ***The Bishop Moshke: Another Riddle Tale***



A bishop was once very angry at a Jew named Moshke. So he went to the king and complained about him. He insisted that Moshke be given a good thrashing.

“All right,” said the king. “But first I want to put three questions to you. If you give me the right answers, you can do what you like with Moshke. And you can have three days to think about the answers. The first question is: Where is the middle of the earth? The second is: How many stars are there in the sky? And the third: What will I be thinking when you come back to see me?”

The bishop agreed to this test and went home. He thought and thought, but he couldn’t light on the answers. Then it occurred to him that he would ask Moshke. “It’s true,” he thought, “I’m planning to do him harm, but he doesn’t know it. I have a feeling that he can guess the answers, and that I can get him to tell me what they are.”

So the bishop called Moshke to his house and told him what the questions were. Moshke said, “Give me a little time to think.” He thought and thought and thought. Then he said, “Take off your clothes and hang them in the next room. Then run naked around the room seven times. After that I’ll be ready to tell you the answers.”

The bishop did as he was told. And Moshke went into the room where the bishop’s clothes were and put them on. Then he left to see the king. The king stared and stared at him.

“What are you thinking?” Moshke said. “I know what you’re thinking. You think that I’m the bishop, but I’m not. I’m Moshke the Jew.”

The king was amazed that he had answered one of his questions right. He said, “Very well, I’ll ask you the other questions now. If you answer them correctly, you’ll discover what you have earned.”

Moshke said, “Very well, ask me.”

The king said, “Where is the middle of the world?”

Moshke thought for a while, then tapped his foot and said, “It’s right here.”

“How do you know?” asked the king.

“If you don’t believe me, be good enough to measure it for yourself.” When the king heard that, he decided it was the better part of wisdom to believe him.

“And now,” said the king, “here is the last question. How many stars are there in the sky?”

Moshke thought for a while. He reckoned and reckoned. Then he said, “There are ninety-eight thousand, seven hundred and sixty stars.”

The astonished king asked, “How is it that you know the number so precisely?”

Moshke replied, “Count them for yourself and see whether I’m right.”

“Your cleverness has just saved your hide,” said the king. “And because you were able to answer all of my questions, I’m going to make you my chief counselor. And now we’ll take a droshky to the bishop’s house. We can let him know that I’ve given you the right to do to him what he was going to do to you.”

The king and Moshke drove to the bishop’s house, where they found that worthy running naked round and round a table. At the sight of him the king burst out laughing.

The end of the matter was that the bishop was given a good thrashing and Moshke lived on in the king’s favor.