# ***Good Manners and Foolish Khushim***



Until he was sixteen, Khushim the Fool lolled about on top of the oven and never went anywhere. His mother said, “Khushim, why don’t you get out of the house? It’ll do you good to rub shoulders with other people.”

“All right, Mother,” he said. So he left the house and went out into the street, and there he saw a crowd. He pressed his way into the middle of it and started to rub against the people, for which they beat him soundly. When he came home weeping, his mother said, “My son, when you mingle with people you have to greet them. If it’s morning, you say ‘Good morning.’ If it’s afternoon, you say ‘God be with you.’ If it’s evening, you say ‘Good evening.’ When you take your leave in the afternoon, you say ‘Good day,’ and if it’s night you say ‘Good night’.”

“Good, Mother,” said Khushim. “I’ll do as you say.”

He went out into the street, and there he saw a funeral procession. He ran up to the mourners and cried, “Good morning. God be with you. Good evening. Good day. Good night,” for which they beat him soundly.

When he came home weeping, his mother said, “My son, if you come upon a funeral procession, you’re supposed to weep. And if the deceased is a young man, you say, ‘Woe, woe. Such a young tree to be felled in its prime.’ And if he’s old, you say, ‘May he rest in paradise’.”

“Good, Mother,” said Khushim. “I’ll do as you say.”

He went out into the street, where he saw a wedding procession going by. The musicians were playing, the relatives of the bride and groom were dancing. Khushim, seeing them, cried out, “Woe, woe. Such a young tree to be felled in its prime. May he rest in paradise,” for which they beat him soundly.

When he came home weeping, his mother said, “My son, if you see a wedding procession, you cry ‘Congratulations!’ and you sing and dance.”

Khushim said, “Good, Mother. I’ll do as you say.”

He went out into the street and came to a house on fire. People were standing around it weeping and wailing. Khushim called out “Congratulations!” and began to sing and dance, for which they beat him soundly.

When he came home weeping, his mother said. “My son, if you see a house on fire you’re supposed to grab a bucket of water and put out the flames.”

Khushim said, “Good, Mother. I’ll do as you say.”

He went out into the street, and there he saw a house with smoke coming out of its chimney. So he grabbed a bucket of water, climbed up on the roof, and poured the water down the chimney, for which they beat him soundly.

When he came home weeping, his mother said, “My son, you may as well loll about on top of the oven. There’s no point in your rubbing shoulders with the rest of the world.”