# ***Khushim and His Bride***



When Khushim started off to see his prospective bride, his mother said, “My son, cast an eye on the girl to make sure there’s nothing wrong with her.”

At the bride’s home when Khushim was seated at the table, he took an eye out of his pocket and cast it at her, for which they beat him soundly.

When Khushim’s mother came home, she found the house in an uproar, filled with neighbors complaining that Khushim had cut the eyes out of a kid, a calf, and a sheep, for which they beat him soundly.

His mother said, “My son, when you talk in the home of a possible bride, try to make your conversation well-rounded.”

When Khushim returned to the prospective bride’s house, he shouted, “A plate, a bowl, a barrel, a basin, a frying pan,” for which they beat him soundly.

When Khushim came home weeping, his mother said, “My son, here is my calf. Take it to the young woman and she will be reconciled with you.” Khushim took the calf up in his arms and started off. As he went along, the calf began to bellow and kick so violently that it broke out of his arms and escaped, leaving him with his face all bruised.

Khushim returned home weeping. His mother said, “My son, you don’t carry a calf in your arms. You tie a rope to it and make it follow you.” Then she gave him a piece of meat and told him to give it to the prospective bride as a gift.

Khushim took the meat, tied a rope to it, and dragged it along through the streets. Dogs quickly gathered around it, and before long they had eaten it all up. Khushim returned home weeping bitterly.

His mother said, “My son, you’re supposed to put meat into a basket. You put the basket on your shoulder and carry it that way.” Then she told him to invite the young woman to a meal.

Khushim went to the home of the prospective bride. There he grabbed a basket, shoved the young woman into it, put the basket on his shoulder, and carried it home, for which they beat him soundly.

Then his mother said, “You may as well loll about on top of the oven. There’s no point in your going to a prospective bride’s house any more.”