# ***The Hill Pushed Away***



There was trouble in Khelm. There was no water. People who wanted it had to go to a well several versts away. In summer you could die of thirst.

The people of Khelm decided that no one could go on living like that. A solution had to be found. There had to be a closer well. So they decided to push away the hill that stood between them and the well. The entire village took sticks and spades and pushed. They pushed and pushed, but they couldn’t tell whether they had budged the hill. So they decided to take their jackets off and pile them up in a wagon. Then the pile could serve as their marker. So that’s what they did; they took their jackets off. And they pushed and pushed, but while they pushed, they couldn’t see what was happening behind them.

What was happening was this: a rider came by and, finding a wagon piled with clothes, he harnessed his horse to the wagon and drove away with it, clothes and all. The Khelmites meanwhile kept on pushing. At last one of them turned around and saw that the wagonload of clothes was a long way off. They all stopped work and gazed at their marker, which was moving farther and farther into the distance. They concluded that the hill had decided to move of its own accord. Thus there was no point in pushing anymore, because the hill was moving toward the well by itself.

They went to get their clothes, but no matter how much they walked, they couldn’t overtake the wagon. To this day the Khelmites have no jackets, and they still hope to overtake their marker.