# ***The Melamed’s Trunk***



In the synagogue in Khelm this is inscribed on the *balemer*, the platform from which the Torah is read:

A *melamed* is forbidden three things:


*1. He may not live on a hill*.

*2. He may not have a suitcase on wheels*.

*3. He may not eat strudle*.


You see, it had been the custom in Khelm for boys to be examined orally Friday evening on their lessons. One Friday morning a *melamed* came to tutor the son in a Khelmite’s house. He noticed a strudle in the kitchen and asked the servant, “What’s that?”

“A strudle,” she replied.

The *melamed* went home and, giving his wife a two-zloty coin, told her to bake a strudle. Instead she used the money to buy her son a pair of shoes. When the *melamed* asked, “Where is the strudle?” she told him what she had done, and he flew into a rage.

Now, as it happened, there was an open trunk on wheels standing nearby. The two of them quarreled so fiercely that they fell into the trunk. The lid closed, the trunk began to roll and, since their house was on a hill, it rolled with all possible speed until it reached the market square. When people saw the rolling trunk, they set up a hullabaloo. They shuttered their shops and ran to the synagogue, where they caused the *shoyfer* to be blown. Finally, in God’s good time, the trunk stopped rolling. The rabbi and all the town’s Jews moved hesitantly toward it. When the trunk was opened, the *melamed* and his wife leaped out.

And that’s why the rabbi and the community leaders established the three rules and caused them to be inscribed on the balemer of the synagogue.