# ***Froyim Greydinger, the Magic Stick, and the Pot of Soup***



Froyim Greydinger—surely you know him, the Galician wit—journeyed once from village to village trying to earn what he could. In the course of his travels he came to an inn. There he asked the innkeeper’s wife to give him something to eat, but she replied that she herself had nothing to eat.

“Bitter news,” Froyim thought as he mulled over what to do about his empty stomach. Looking about, he saw—I should tell you that it was a Thursday—he saw some meat and a freshly killed hen on a cutting board in the kitchen. Smiling, he said to himself, “Aha, so that’s how things are.” Now that he knew who he was dealing with, he was ready to take her on.

Picking up a stick, he toyed with it for a moment and then said, “Do you see this stick, ma’am? With this stick and a pot of water, I could cook you a fine soup.”

The woman was instantly curious. “What kind of stick is that?”

“Oh,” said Froyim with assumed naïveté, “if I stir a pot of water over a fire with this stick, I can cook up any sort of dish at all.”

The moment the woman heard that, she could think of nothing but the stick and how he would make a soup with it. She filled a pot with water, and Froyim set it on top of the stove and started to stir it. He stirred and talked, talked and stirred. “It’s an amazing stick,” he said. “Many’s the time it has saved me from having to go to bed on an empty stomach.”

When the water in the pot had come to a boil, he said, “Tell me, ma’am, would you happen to have a bone, some chicken giblets, and some salt?”

“Of course,” she said. “What a question.” And she handed him a fine marrow bone, some giblets, and salt. Froyim put them all into the pot and continued to stir. He talked and stirred. A moment later he said, “Perhaps you have a carrot, some cabbage, and some groats?”

“Some!” said the woman. “No need to be stingy with them. The Lord be thanked, I have a gardenful of vegetables.” With that she handed him some groats and vegetables, and Froyim put them all into the pot and stirred and talked. Talked and stirred. When he was done, Froyim poured himself a bowl of soup. Tasting it, he smacked his lips with pleasure. Seeing that, the innkeeper’s wife could hardly keep from drooling. “Can I taste it?” she asked.

“By all means,” said Froyim.

He poured a bowlful for her and another one for himself, and even so there was more left over. She tasted it and said, “I have to admit that I haven’t had such a fine soup in a long time. What a wonderful stick! Perhaps you’d like to sell it?”

“Heaven forbid. Never. The stick was part of my inheritance. And yet, hmmm. You’re such a fine woman. You have such a generous heart. Hmm. Suppose … let’s just suppose I could sell it, how much would you give?”

“Let me see,” said the innkeeper’s wife. “Would a ruble do?”

“A ruble?” said Froyim. “Heaven forbid. No. I won’t sell it for money.”

“Then what would you take?”

“No money, that’s for sure,” said Froyim firmly. “Just think of it! Part of an inheritance that has come down to me through generations. Still, who knows … perhaps … if you’ll give me that freshly killed hen in addition to the ruble, I’ll make you a present of the stick.”

Well, they arrived at a trade, though Froyim hesitated for a moment. But finally he gave her the stick and returned home carrying a fat hen for the Sabbath and a ruble into the bargain.