# ***The Visitor from the World Beyond***



An innkeeper bought his family meat and fish and told his simpleton wife to get them ready for *shabes nakhmu*, the Sabbath of Consolation.

On Friday evening just before the meal, a visitor appeared at the innkeeper’s house. “A good Sabbath to you,” he said. As it happened, the innkeeper was not at home just then, so the innkeeper’s wife said, “Are you *Shabes Nakhmu*?” The visitor, sensing an opportunity of some kind, said, “Yes, I am.”

The innkeeper’s wife said, “I have everything ready for you. There’s fish, and meat, and so on.” Then she served him all the good things she had prepared.

When he had done eating and drinking, she asked, “Where are you from?”

“From the world beyond,” he replied.

“How are my parents doing there?” she asked.

“Quite well,” he said, “but they suffer a little from the cold. You wouldn’t perhaps be able to send them some clothing?”

So she gathered up her husband’s suits and her dresses and gave them to the stranger.

When the innkeeper came home, she told him that *Shabes Nakhmo* had been there and that she had given him food and drink, as well as all their suits and dresses.

“What have you done?” he shouted. “How in the world could *shabes nakhmu* be here?”

Quickly the innkeeper harnessed the horses to his wagon and drove off in pursuit of the stranger. But that sly fellow, suspecting that he might be followed, went into a forest, stripped himself naked, and put his arms around a tree.

Driving through the forest and seeing a naked man embracing a tree, the innkeeper stopped his wagon. “Did a man carrying a bundle go by here?” he asked.

“Yes,” said the naked man. “I saw him.”

The innkeeper said, “Will you be good enough to chase him and bring him back here?”



“I’m sorry, I can’t,” said the thief. “As you see, I’m holding up this tree, which happens to be the tree that holds up the world. If I go away the tree will fall, and then, of course, the whole world will. Although if you like, you can take your clothes off and hold up the tree in my place. Then I’ll be glad to chase the fellow with the bundle.”

The innkeeper took all his clothes off and put his arms around the tree while the thief, jumping into the wagon, drove off.