# ***The Ten Women***



Once upon a time women decided that they, too, wanted to form a *minyen*, a prayer quorum of ten, and pray together as a group, just like the men. So they sent a deputation to the Lord of the Universe.

“*Reboyne shel oylem*,” they said, “why are we any worse than the men? Why can’t ten women get together and pray as a group?”

The Lord of the Universe replied, “If you can manage to count to ten, you have my promise that you too can form a *minyen*.”

So the rabbi’s wife hurriedly gathered together the worthiest women of the town and told them what the Lord had said.

She led the women to the synagogue, and once they were inside, she started to count them. But she included herself in the count, so there turned out to be eleven. Seeing that, she asked one of the women to step out of the group and counted once more. But this time she forgot to count herself, so now she counted nine women. Well, she asked the woman who had stepped aside to rejoin the group. This time when the rabbi’s wife counted, she included herself, so once again there were eleven.

When she saw that she continually miscounted, she decided that it would be better if she got each of them to make a figure of clay and poke a hole in it with her finger. Then by counting the holes, she would know how many women there were.

But one of the women in the group was a snuff sniffer. When she worked with her clay, she put two fingers into it, as if taking a pinch of snuff. So when the rabbi’s wife counted the holes, she came up with the number eleven again.

Then, seeing that using fingers had produced a miscount, she got the idea of telling the women to make the holes in the clay with their tongues. After all, each person has only one tongue.

So the clay figures were re-formed and each woman made a hole with her tongue. But one of the women had such a long nose, that when she bent to make a hole with her tongue, she poked another hole with her nose. When the rabbi’s wife counted the holes, she was dismayed to come out with eleven once more. Feeling at an impasse, and unable to think what to do, she ran helter-skelter to the rabbi and asked his advice.

“How can I help you,” he said, “if you insist on poking your noses where they don’t belong?”

And the moral of this tale is: Women! Don’t poke your noses into the affairs of men.